# Introduction

> \singlespacing 'Being a poet is a form of admitted self-recognition and self-description inside a schedule of professions and roles within the social categories of a community and the nomenclatures for operational identity' ---J.H. Prynne.^[J.H. Prynne, 'The Poet's Imaginary', *Chicago Review*, 58.1 (Summer 2013), 89--105 (p. 93).]

\noindent This thesis offers a survey of the context in which the British poet J.H. Prynne began his literary career, focussing specifically on the period between 1955 and 1975 and seeking to reorient critical attention towards certain traditions, influences and social and literary *milieux* which have been overlooked in scholarship to date. These neglected contexts are then read back into Prynne's prose work to offer several new perspectives on his intellectual, political and ethical outlook. Following a very brief review of existing work on Prynne, this introduction maps the territory which the remainder of the thesis sets out to explore, explaining both its methodological peculiarities---principally its reliance on Prynne's prose rather than his poetry---and its overall shape.

While Prynne's poetry has received minor critical attention ever since the publication of his debut collection, *Force of Circumstance and Other Poems*, in 1962, serious scholarly discussion can be said to begin a decade later with Donald Davie's *Thomas Hardy and British Poetry* (1972). Here, in what Keston Sutherland terms 'a spirit of literary partisanship', Prynne is inserted by Davie---his former supervisor as an undergraduate and briefly as a doctoral student at Jesus College, Cambridge---into a resolutely English poetic tradition.^[Keston Sutherland, 'J.H. Prynne and Philology' (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 2004), p. 111. The academic and poetic relationship between Davie and Prynne will be discussed at length in Chapter 1 of the present thesis.]  Prynne's work is also used by Veronica Forrest-Thomson in her posthumously published *Poetic Artifice* (1978) to explicate a theory of poetic language. A number of short reviews and studies of individual poems appeared throughout the 1970s, mainly in small venues such as *Prospice* and *Grosseteste Review*, while the publication in 1982 of Prynne's collected poems provoked a much wider interest in his work, receiving attention in organs as high-profile as the *London Review of Books*. The first book-length study of Prynne's work, N.H. Reeve and Richard Kerridge's *Nearly Too Much: The Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, appeared in 1995, following an increasing number of articles both in 'little magazines' and in mainstream scholarly journals. More recently, Anthony Mellors's *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne* (2005) includes extended discussion of the poetry, while Ian Brinton's essay collection *A Manner of Utterance* (2009) collects a number of articles on the same subject. Further analysis is provided by dedicated editions of the journals *Jacket* (24, 2002), *QUID* (17, 2006) and *Glossator* (2, 2010), while doctoral theses focussing primarily on Prynne have been produced by N.R. Burrell, D.S. Marriott, Anthony Mellors, Rachel Campbell-Johnston, Birgitta Johansson, Sutherland, Ryan Dobran and Matthew Hall.^[N.R. Burrell, 'The Language of Silence is no Paradox: Enervation & Renewal in the Poetry of J.H. Prynne' (unpublished doctoral thesis, American University of London, 1993); D.S. Marriott, 'An Introduction to the Poetry of J.H. Prynne (1962--1977)' (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Sussex, 1993); Anthony Mellors, 'Poetic Space and the Late Modernist Text: The Theory and Context of J.H. Prynne's Writings from 1960--1974' (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Oxford, 1993); Rachel Campbell-Johnston, 'The Difficult Matter; A Reading of the Poetry of J.H. Prynne' (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1994); Birgitta Johansson, *The Engineering of Being: An Ontological Approach to J.H. Prynne* (Umeå: Acta Universitatis Umensis, 1997); Ryan Dobran, 'The Difficult Style: A Study of the Poetry of J.H. Prynne' (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 2013); Matthew Hall, *On Violence in the Work of J.H. Prynne* (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014).]

There are two related issues with the prevailing focus of scholarship on Prynne, which it will be the task of this thesis to clarify. The first is manifested in a general bias towards text rather than context. Existing studies of Prynne's work tend to concentrate very closely on the poetry itself, or on related theoretical issues, without paying much attention to the historical conditions of its composition, publication and distribution. To take a prominent example, Reeve and Kerridge's *Nearly Too Much* consists of four chapters, the first two of which read Prynne's work through pre-determined literary concepts ('Questions of Scale', 'Lyricism'), while the third relates the poetry to 'theory' as such (Bakhtin, Kristeva, Lyotard) and the fourth consists of a long reading of the *The Oval Window* (1983). Mellors's *Late Modernist Poetics* is similarly theory-driven, its chapters headed by concepts such as shamanism, obscurity and the uncanny, which structure the subsequent readings of Prynne's work to the exclusion of historical detail.^[This is not to suggest that 'theory-driven' scholarship is not a necessary and valuable contribution to the steadily growing corpus of work on Prynne; merely that its continued proliferation, at the expense of more basic historical research, risks making that corpus seem distinctly lopsided, and perhaps even contributes to the continued marginalisation of Prynne within mainstream literary history by rendering much of the secondary literature inaccessible to readers not well-versed in the theoretical issues surrounding avant-garde contemporary poetry. Whether Prynne's marginalisation within mainstream literary history is considered a problem by scholars of his work is another matter.]  That the most powerful counterexample is Alex Latter's recent monograph *Late Modernism and 'The English Intelligencer'* (2015), a book which does not even include an entire chapter on Prynne, only serves to emphasise the lack of local historical analysis in what has gone before.^[Following the model of the fourth chapter of Sutherland's 'J.H. Prynne and Philology', Matthew Hall's recent doctoral thesis on violence in Prynne's work includes some exemplary readings of the poetry in relation to large-scale national and global political history, but---with some exceptions, such as the connection of *Acrylic Tips* to the work of John Kinsella (Hall, pp. 130--32)---is less concerned with the local history of the work's production. Ryan Dobran's thesis makes full use of both modes, dealing with subjects ranging from the election of Ted Heath to Prynne's relationships with Laurence Picken, Joseph Needham, Francis Crick and Rupert Sheldrake, but is less straightforwardly historical than Latter's work, being organised around the concept of difficulty.]  

It would obviously be optimistic to expect a large body of rigorously historicist scholarship to have already emerged around Prynne, when book-length studies of his poetry can still be counted on the fingers of one hand. Nevertheless, Prynne is surprisingly ill-served even by basic literary history of a semi-biographical type. Brinton's articles for *PN Review*, which inevitably lack the full apparatus of academic scholarship, nevertheless remain some of the only pieces actually to pay sustained attention to the publication contexts of Prynne's poems.^[A characteristic example is Ian Brinton, '"A common meeting point": Andrew Crozier's Involvement with *The English Intelligencer* and *The Wivenhoe Park Review*', *PN Review*, 38.3 (2012), pp. 54--56, which includes detailed discussion of Prynne's role as editor of *Prospect* and uses archival material to show the importance accorded by Prynne to the ordering of his poems in publication.]  The notorious impenetrability of Prynne's work is no doubt part of the reason for this situation: it is difficult to illustrate accessible, macro-level historical argument with poetry when the poetry itself requires extensive explanation and interpretation almost every time it is used. Yet it is perhaps also the combined result of close personal association between Prynne's foremost critics and the poet himself---primarily through pedagogical relationships but also in the context of a relatively close-knit avant-garde poetic community---and Prynne's own published comments on the irrelevance of any criticism involving biography. When in 'Mental Ears and Poetic Work' Prynne ventriloquises a 'primitive' critic---'Look, the poet is wearing red socks! Now at last we understand everything!'---it is hard not to take this as an implicit warning against any such approach to his own work.^[Prynne, 'Mental Ears and Poetic Work', *Chicago Review*, 55.1 (November 2010), 126--57 (p. 130). This position has led to an erroneous depiction of Prynne in parts of the mainstream press as a sort of poetic recluse. In a 2014 discussion with Nicholas Royle, Prynne acknowledged and even attempted to dispel this image, admitting that it was 'time to relax' about biographical questions (Prynne, 'A Dialogue with Nicholas Royle' [seminar, University of Sussex, 11 March 2014]). Importantly, Prynne has in his own scholarship and teaching made little effort to avoid comparisons between life and work. His notes for undergraduates on Ezra Pound, for example, begin with a three-page biographical chronology, complete with two separate references for further material about Pound's life (Prynne, 'Reading Pound: Background', *Gonville and Caius College*, \<http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk/students/study/english/pound/pound0.pdf\> [accessed 8 January 2016].]

The second major problem with scholarship on Prynne appears as a bias against consideration of the very earliest stages of his career, and therefore, in combination with the focus on text over context, against the influences that shaped that part of his career. The precise details of this bias will be considered in the introduction to Chapter 1, but it is important at this stage to take account of what it obscures. For many critics of Prynne's work, his poetic career is taken to begin in earnest with 1968's *Kitchen Poems*; that is to say, Prynne's deliberate suppression of his debut collection, *Force of Circumstance*, is accepted relatively unproblematically. Counterintuitively, this would be less of a problem for Prynne scholarship in general if *Force of Circumstance* was more similar in style to the later work. As it stands, the sense that the book is an obvious outlier leads to an unjustifiable hypostatisation of the break that follows its publication. A seemingly unbreachable wall having been erected between *Force of Circumstance* and what follows it, everything associated with the book is left on the far side, presumed to be irrelevant to the later work. As will be argued in Chapter 1, the fact that this shift in Prynne's work---and it is certainly an important shift---coincides with his increasing receptivity to American poetry has the effect of 'nationalising' the respective parts of his career, with certain English contexts being ignored, even where they might shed new light on much of what Prynne was writing throughout the later 1960s and '70s.

In order to counter the two problems identified above---a focus on text over context and a reluctance to consider the earliest phase of Prynne's career---this thesis will concentrate almost exclusively on Prynne's prose work rather than his poetry. Such a drastic restriction in scope requires some justification. It is important to emphasise from the outset that this is primarily a methodological decision rather than a choice about content. In other words, while certain prose pieces will be read in detail, and their status as prose made an object of analysis, this is not intended to be a thesis *about* Prynne's prose. Rather, it is a thesis which adopts Prynne's prose as a tool---one among many---to explore the broader contexts of his literary career. There are two characteristics which make the prose a particularly effective tool for this job. At the most basic level, Prynne's prose writing is significantly more transparent to contextual analysis than his poetry. While the style is in some cases just as obscure, this is not usually the case. Furthermore, Prynne's prose pieces tend to be tied much more obviously to specific occasions of composition and publication, e.g. as book reviews, letters in response to recent articles, or syntheses of pre-existing scholarship, than do his poems, allowing analysis to extend outwards into these contexts without encountering major barriers to understanding.^[Prynne admits this himself, albeit negatively, in 'The Poet's Imaginary', claiming that 'above all other classes of writing, a poem is least likely to ensue from specific purposes already motivating its occasion' (Prynne, 'The Poet's Imaginary', p. 89).]  The relative lack of existing critical work on Prynne's prose also allows these pieces to escape the often too rigid periodising of his career that attends analysis of the poetry.

Critical discussion of Prynne's prose work has generally been undertaken as a means of entry to the poetry. One of the most frequently discussed works is the very early piece 'Resistance and Difficulty', in which Prynne presents a theory of poetic difficulty influenced by contemporary phenomenology. This work has been considered at length in Ph.D. theses by Marriott, Sutherland, Dobran and Nandini Ramesh Sankar.^[Nandini Ramesh Sankar, 'Poetics of Difficulty in Postmodern Poetry' (unpublished doctoral thesis, Cornell University, 2012).]  Simon Jarvis engages with a similarly early piece, 'The Elegiac World in Victorian Poetry', in a recent essay on rhyme.^[Simon Jarvis, 'Why rhyme pleases', *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011), 17--43 (p. 21).]  A more regularly cited work is 'A Note on Metal', first published in *The English Intelligencer* and subsequently printed in pamphlet form alongside the poem 'Aristeas, in Seven Years' before being included in *Poems*. This piece has been discussed briefly by Jarvis, Robin Purves, Reitha Pattison, Latter and Nicholas Royle, and more substantially by Seeta Chaganti and C.D. Blanton.^[Jarvis, 'Quality and the non-identical in J.H. Prynne's "Aristeas, in Seven Years"', *Parataxis*, 1 (1991), 69--86 (p. 83); Robin Purves, 'Commentary on J.H. Prynne's "Thoughts on the Esterházy Court Uniform"', *Glossator*, 2 (2010), 79--88 (pp. 80--81); Reitha Pattison, 'J.H. Prynne's "The Corn Burned By Syrius"', *ibid*., 89--114 (pp. 103--14); Alex Latter, '"Scheming for the possible world": J.H. Prynne's *The White Stones* and *The English Intelligencer*', *Intercapillary Space*, \<http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/scheming-for-possible-world-j.html\> [accessed 10 October 2013] (para. 2); Nicholas Royle, *Veering: A Theory of Literature* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2011), p. 51, n. 42; Seeta Chaganti, 'Vestigial Signs: Inscription, Performance, and *The Dream of the Rood*', *PMLA*, 125 (2010), pp. 48--72; C.D. Blanton, 'Nominal Devolutions: Poetic Substance and the Critique of Political Economy', *Yale Journal of Criticism*, 13 (2000), pp. 129--51.]  Johansson, Jow Lindsay, Justin Katko and others have written on 'The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts', whose inclusion in the collected poems has---as with 'A Note on Metal'---led to some confusion over its poetic/prosaic status, while Gerald Bruns, in a recent *Chicago Review* article, further complicates the poetry/prose distinction with reference to *Kazoo Dreamboats* (2011).^[Jow Lindsay, 'Excerpt from An Open Letter to J.H. Prynne', *QUID*, 17 (2006), pp. 35--39; Justin Katko, 'Relativistic Phytosophy: Towards a Commentary on "The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts"', *Glossator*, 2 (2010), pp. 245--94; Gerald Bruns, 'Dialectrics; or, Turmoil & Contradiction: A Reading of J. H. Prynne's *Kazoo Dreamboats*', *Chicago Review*, 57.3/4 (Winter 2013), pp. 54--70.]  Prynne's 1993 lecture-essay *Stars, Tigers and the Shape of Words*, which deals with the linguistic problem of arbitrariness, has received wider attention than many of his earlier works, being cited by Charles Bernstein, Edward Nye and Derek Attridge; meanwhile, his slightly later 'Discourse on Willem de Kooning's *Rosy-Fingered Dawn at Louse Point*' has proved useful to scholars of de Kooning and Frank O'Hara, notably Lytle Shaw and Sam Ladkin, as well as to those with a more contemporary focus such as Peter Middleton.^[Charles Bernstein, 'Introduction', in *Close Listening: Poetry and the Performed Word*, ed. by Bernstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998), 3--26 (p. 17); Edward Nye, *Literary and Linguistic Theories in Eighteenth-Century France: From 'Nuances' to 'Impertinence'* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 174--75; Derek Attridge, *Moving Words: Forms of English Poetry* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 89--91; Lytle Shaw, *Frank O'Hara: The Poetics of Coterie* (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2006), pp. 179--83; Sam Ladkin, 'Glancing paintings and poems: figuration and abstraction in Clark Coolidge's *Polaroid* and Willem de Kooning's *Excavation*', *Textual Practice*, 26 (2012), 421--448 (pp. 434--35); Peter Middleton, *Distant Reading: Performance, Readership and Consumption in Contemporary Poetry* (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press, 2005), p. 182.]  A more recent jumping-off point for analysis of Prynne's poetry, as well as broader linguistic and phonological issues, is provided by 'Mental Ears and Poetic Work', which has been discussed by Attridge and Lacy Rumsey.^[Attridge, pp. 85--91; Lacy Rumsey, 'The Obstinate reader: Prynne, prosody and degrees of engagement', *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011), 44--66 (pp. 48--49).]  Christopher Nealon also uses a number of Prynne's prose works to support his argument in 'The Prynne Reflex', but does not consider any in great detail.^[Chris Nealon, 'The Prynne Reflex', *The Claudius App*, 4 (2013), \<http://theclaudiusapp.com/4-nealon.html\> [accessed 10 October 2013].]

Recalling one of a number of visits to Ezra Pound during his incarceration at St Elizabeth's Hospital in the late 1940s, Charles Olson writes that 'I asked him if anybody had commented on his prose. He started out to say plenty, but I saw he meant the subject matter, and I stopped him, and meant as language, but that was the end of the interview.'^[Charles Olson and Ezra Pound, *An Encounter at St. Elizabeth's*, ed. by Catherine Seelye (New York: Grossman, 1975), p. 81.]  While the review above is admittedly partial, focussing on texts which will be considered in the present thesis, it is nevertheless representative enough to make clear that the situation in Prynne's case is worse, with very little commentary existing on either the content *or* the language of his prose work. While the pieces can be assigned roughly to the periods of Prynne's poetic work by their dates of composition, this operation is for the most part not justified by analysis of the texts themselves. The freedom which this situation allows will be particularly evident in Chapter 1, in which prose from the early stages of Prynne's career is discussed in order to gain a clearer picture of his early influences than that which emerges from the poetry alone. Through the use both of published pieces and of archival material such as letters, which fall under this thesis's definition of prose, an idiosyncratic and specifically British intellectual *milieu* anchored by the work of Donald Davie and F.R. Leavis is proposed as an important and hitherto overlooked context for Prynne's early work. This context is then connected to a conception of the academy, and the University of Cambridge in particular, which, it is claimed, extends throughout Prynne's career. In the first half of Chapter 2, a similar strategy is used to illuminate the little magazine scene which served as a conduit for so much of Prynne's poetry and prose throughout the 1960s and '70s. As in Chapter 1, attention is paid to activities which blur the boundary between what is generally considered to be Prynne's juvenilia and the work of his mature career, while a focus on material practices and contexts is maintained. The second half of this chapter, by contrast, accepts the textual focus of current Prynne scholarship, but turns this attitude in the direction of a prose text, undertaking an extended reading of Prynne's 1967 piece 'A Note on Metal' and exploring questions about the nature of his prose work in detail. Finally, Chapter 3 turns to prose fiction, proposing a third key context for Prynne's work in the writing of Wyndham Lewis, Edward Upward and Douglas Oliver. These three authors are claimed to occupy a loose tradition into which Prynne also intervenes with his 1974 text 'The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts'. As in Chapters 1 and 2, Prynne's letters, published and unpublished, are used to support the idea of a coherent context for his work, while potential rifts and inconsistencies are also acknowledged. This thesis is thus structured in a roughly tripartite fashion, with the mid-point of the second chapter signalling a shift from the contextual to the textual, while the final chapter incorporates both modes of analysis. Allied to this structure is a broad movement from the descriptive to the argumentative and evaluative as the work progresses.

In-keeping with the largely contextual focus of this thesis, the choice of the period 1955--75 as its object of study was made by looking simultaneously at the internal contours of Prynne's career and at events outside it. The concept of 'the Long Sixties', defined roughly as the period 1958--74, is familiar from the work of Arthur Marwick, and just as in Marwick's model the initial date of this thesis's expanded scope is firmer than its endpoint.^[As Marwick points out, 'many of the new trends of the sixties continued throughout the seventies, and right on to today' (Arthur Marwick, *The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy and the United States, c. 1958--c. 1974* [Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998], p. 7).]  1955 was Prynne's final year at school; it is also the date of his earliest recorded poem, and of his first involvement with a little magazine, as editor of the sixth-form journal which published it, a position which will be examined in Chapter 2.^[Prynne, 'Stille (nach Thomas Hood)', *Six* (1955), p. 11.]  In broader historical terms, any number of factors could be cited to support a case for 1955 as the beginning of an era in which the cultural emphasis in Britain came to rest firmly on the first rather than the second part of the phrase 'post-war': ten years on from the Second World War's formal end, the first full year without rationing also saw the symbolically important resignation of Winston Churchill as Prime Minister, to be replaced by Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden. Perhaps more importantly for the concerns of this thesis, D.J. Enright's anthology *Poets of the 1950s* was published in 1955, solidifying the poetic infrastructure of 'the Movement' which, as Chapter 1 will argue, helped to determine the course of Prynne's early career.^[Other key publications of that year include the first edition of Donald Davie's *Articulate Energy* and Charles Tomlinson's first mature collection, *The Necklace*.]  As acknowledged above, 1975 is weaker than 1955 as a point of periodisation; nevertheless, it has some key virtues. According with the terminal point given by Mellors for 'late modernism' (1945--1975), it includes Prynne's significant collection *Wound Response* (1974) and its associated prose text, 'The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts', a work which Chapter 3 will argue is highly representative of tendencies present in other prose fiction published throughout this period.^[Mellors, *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne* (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2005), p. 2.]  Importantly for the largely British focus of this thesis, 1975 also marks the first appearance of Prynne's poetry in a language other than English, with the publication of Bernard Dubourg's French translations of *Kitchen Poems*, *Day Light Songs* and *Fire Lizard*.^[Bernard Dubourg, *Poèmes de Cuisine* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975); *Chansons à la Journée-Lumière* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975); *Lézard de Feu* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975).]  This introduction of Prynne's work to continental Europe fits neatly with the British electorate's decision of the same year in favour of the United Kingdom's continued membership of the Common Market, a vote which has until recent events been taken as a mandate for involvement in the European Communities' associated and successor institutions.

Inevitably, there are relevant areas of enquiry which, primarily for reasons of space, this thesis is not able to pursue. The first of these is Prynne's relation to the concept of the nation in general, and the United Kingdom in particular. This thesis generally uses the terms 'England' and 'English' when referring to poets born, living or writing in England and 'Britain' or 'British' when referring to the state, acknowledging the existence of culturally distinct poetic traditions in Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. This is not to deny the many geographic rifts within England as a cultural entity, but the fact that England is in the present work generally used in broad-brush opposition to the concept of 'America' justifies a degree of generalisation. In any case, Prynne's Englishness (though not necessarily his *idea* of it) fits for the most part within a Home Counties, Received Pronunciation, public school--Oxbridge, BBC model which for the bulk of the period under study here remained culturally hegemonic. Adding to the pressures against including a detailed study of nationhood in this thesis is the fact that these issues were considered at length in the author's own M.Phil. dissertation, and while some of its conclusions would be dissented from in the present context, the evidence and analysis on which they are based would not.^[Louis Goddard, 'National and Private Identity in the Prose of J.H. Prynne' (unpublished M.Phil. thesis, University of Cambridge, 2013).]  The other topic largely absent from this thesis is less straightforward. The study of Prynne's prose was compared above to the study of Ezra Pound's, but this is far from being the only point of connection between the two men. In fact, the figure of Pound could be said to haunt every one of the following chapters. The vitriolic and polemical tone of Prynne's critical writing and correspondence, discussed in relation to Leavis in Chapter 1, has a lineage which could equally---perhaps even more justifiably---be traced to Pound. Like Pound, Prynne has acted as a sort of poetic impresario for friends and acquaintances, a set of activities which is considered in Chapter 1 and the first half of Chapter 2. Even Prynne's discussion of the relation between abstraction, corruption and value in 'A Note on Metal', considered at length in the second half of the latter chapter, has shades of Pound's economic thought, and while Chapter 3 does engage briefly with Pound on a direct level, this is subordinated to a focus on Wyndham Lewis. It would be misleading to claim that Pound is excluded from the body of this thesis for the same reason that it does not include detailed studies of Olson and Ed Dorn---namely, that he is an American. Pound's long-term expatriate status would make such an exclusion problematic, to say the least. The real reason is again one of space. To provide a full account of Prynne's relation to Pound would (and perhaps one day will) be the task of an entire thesis, not merely a section of one. As the subtitle of Mellors's *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne* indicates, some of this work has already been done, but not to an extent which would prevent other important material from being crowded out in a work as short as this one. Mellors's focus, moreover, is primarily on the cultural transmission of a particular understanding of myth, rather than on broader structural and sociological similarities between his three main subjects: Pound, Olson and Prynne. The figure of Pound will, nevertheless, be brought back to the surface in this thesis's conclusion, used to draw together and reflect on the foregoing analysis.
\newpage

