\pagenumbering{gobble}
\begin{titlepage}
\title{J.H. Prynne in Context, 1955--1975}
\author{Louis Goddard}
\date{\vfill Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy\\
    University of Sussex\\
    September 2016}
\maketitle
\end{titlepage}\newpage

\pagenumbering{arabic} \tableofcontents
\newpage

Frontmatter
===========

Summary
-------

\noindent This thesis presents a partial survey of the intellectual and
cultural environment in which the contemporary British poet J.H. Prynne
began his literary career. Its primary contribution to knowledge
consists of a reorientation of critical perspective towards Prynne’s
early career and its specifically British contexts, as well as a
detailed literary-historical account of his relation to those contexts.
This account proceeds by analysis of Prynne’s prose works rather than
his poetry, leading to a secondary contribution in the form of a number
of new readings of those works and a consideration of Prynne’s attitude
towards prose as a form. Extensive use is made of archival material,
much of which has not been examined in previous scholarship.

The Introduction sets out the methodology of the thesis and argues that
existing work on Prynne suffers from interlinked biases against
consideration of Prynne’s early career and his British influences.
Chapter 1 offers an account of a particular network of such influences
centred on the University of Cambridge, looking at one regularly cited
influence, Donald Davie, and arguing for recognition of a new one in
F.R. Leavis. In Chapter 2, Prynne’s involvement with the ‘little
magazine’ scene is considered in detail and an extended reading of his
1967 piece ‘A Note on Metal’ is used to reflect on the relationship
between prose and its publication contexts. Chapter 3, meanwhile,
proposes a third key context for Prynne’s early career in the prose
fiction of Wyndham Lewis, Edward Upward and Douglas Oliver, before
offering a model for Prynne’s poetic thinking in this period based on
the panspermia hypothesis. The Conclusion attempts to name this model
more specifically, while reflecting on the validity of the thesis’s
semi-biographical approach.

Declaration
-----------

\noindent I hereby declare that this thesis has not been—and will not
be—submitted in whole or in part to another University for the award of
any other degree. \newline
\newline
\newline
\noindent Signature: …………………… \newpage

Acknowledgements
----------------

I would like to thank my primary and secondary supervisors, Keston
Sutherland and Sara Crangle, for the invaluable guidance and unique
insight that they have brought to this project, as well as the Arts and
Humanities Research Council and the University of Sussex for supporting
it financially. I am grateful to the Thomas J. Dodd Research Center at
the University of Connecticut, both for the provision of a Strochlitz
Travel Grant and for the assistance and hospitality generously offered
by archivists Melissa Watterworth Batt and Tanya Rose. I would also like
to thank Sue Brown, former archivist at St Dunstan’s College, Catford.
Colleagues and friends have been vital to this project: Ian Patterson,
Alex Latter, Michael Tencer and Ian Brinton have all assisted in smaller
or larger ways and I have benefited greatly from conversations with Ian
Heames, Piers Pennington, Luke Roberts and above all Kay Miller.
Finally, I am grateful to J.H. Prynne both for his intellectual rigour
and for his personal generosity, qualities which run like twin seams
through his life and work. \newpage

Introduction
============

> \singlespacing Being a poet is a form of admitted self-recognition and
> self-description inside a schedule of professions and roles within the
> social categories of a community and the nomenclatures for operational
> identity —J.H. Prynne.[^1]

\noindent This thesis offers a survey of the context in which the
British poet J.H. Prynne began his literary career, focussing
specifically on the period between 1955 and 1975 and seeking to reorient
critical attention towards certain traditions, influences and social and
literary *milieux* which have been overlooked in scholarship to date.
These neglected contexts are then read back into Prynne’s prose work to
offer several new perspectives on his intellectual, political and
ethical outlook. Following a very brief review of existing work on
Prynne, this introduction maps the territory which the remainder of the
thesis sets out to explore, explaining both its methodological
peculiarities—principally its reliance on Prynne’s prose rather than his
poetry—and its overall shape.

While Prynne’s poetry has received minor critical attention ever since
the publication of his debut collection, *Force of Circumstance and
Other Poems*, in 1962, serious scholarly discussion can be said to begin
a decade later with Donald Davie’s *Thomas Hardy and British Poetry*
(1972). Here, in what Keston Sutherland terms ‘a spirit of literary
partisanship’, Prynne is inserted by Davie—his former supervisor as an
undergraduate and briefly as a doctoral student at Jesus College,
Cambridge—into a resolutely English poetic tradition.[^2] Prynne’s work
is also used by Veronica Forrest-Thomson in her posthumously published
*Poetic Artifice* (1978) to explicate a theory of poetic language. A
number of short reviews and studies of individual poems appeared
throughout the 1970s, mainly in small venues such as *Prospice* and
*Grosseteste Review*, while the publication in 1982 of Prynne’s
collected poems provoked a much wider interest in his work, receiving
attention in organs as high-profile as the *London Review of Books*. The
first book-length study of Prynne’s work, N.H. Reeve and Richard
Kerridge’s *Nearly Too Much: The Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, appeared in
1995, following an increasing number of articles both in ‘little
magazines’ and in mainstream scholarly journals. More recently, Anthony
Mellors’s *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne* (2005) includes
extended discussion of the poetry, while Ian Brinton’s essay collection
*A Manner of Utterance* (2009) collects a number of articles on the same
subject. Further analysis is provided by dedicated editions of the
journals *Jacket* (24, 2002), *QUID* (17, 2006) and *Glossator* (2,
2010), while doctoral theses focussing primarily on Prynne have been
produced by N.R. Burrell, D.S. Marriott, Anthony Mellors, Rachel
Campbell-Johnston, Birgitta Johansson, Sutherland, Ryan Dobran and
Matthew Hall.[^3]

There are two related issues with the prevailing focus of scholarship on
Prynne, which it will be the task of this thesis to clarify. The first
is manifested in a general bias towards text rather than context.
Existing studies of Prynne’s work tend to concentrate very closely on
the poetry itself, or on related theoretical issues, without paying much
attention to the historical conditions of its composition, publication
and distribution. To take a prominent example, Reeve and Kerridge’s
*Nearly Too Much* consists of four chapters, the first two of which read
Prynne’s work through pre-determined literary concepts (‘Questions of
Scale’, ‘Lyricism’), while the third relates the poetry to ‘theory’ as
such (Bakhtin, Kristeva, Lyotard) and the fourth consists of a long
reading of the *The Oval Window* (1983). Mellors’s *Late Modernist
Poetics* is similarly theory-driven, its chapters headed by concepts
such as shamanism, obscurity and the uncanny, which structure the
subsequent readings of Prynne’s work to the exclusion of historical
detail.[^4] That the most powerful counterexample is Alex Latter’s
recent monograph *Late Modernism and ‘The English Intelligencer’*
(2015), a book which does not even include an entire chapter on Prynne,
only serves to emphasise the lack of local historical analysis in what
has gone before.[^5]

It would obviously be optimistic to expect a large body of rigorously
historicist scholarship to have already emerged around Prynne, when
book-length studies of his poetry can still be counted on the fingers of
one hand. Nevertheless, Prynne is surprisingly ill-served even by basic
literary history of a semi-biographical type. Brinton’s articles for *PN
Review*, which inevitably lack the full apparatus of academic
scholarship, nevertheless remain some of the only pieces actually to pay
sustained attention to the publication contexts of Prynne’s poems.[^6]
The notorious impenetrability of Prynne’s work is no doubt part of the
reason for this situation: it is difficult to illustrate accessible,
macro-level historical argument with poetry when the poetry itself
requires extensive explanation and interpretation almost every time it
is used. Yet it is perhaps also the combined result of close personal
association between Prynne’s foremost critics and the poet
himself—primarily through pedagogical relationships but also in the
context of a relatively close-knit avant-garde poetic community—and
Prynne’s own published comments on the irrelevance of any criticism
involving biography. When in ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’ Prynne
ventriloquises a ‘primitive’ critic—‘Look, the poet is wearing red
socks! Now at last we understand everything!’—it is hard not to take
this as an implicit warning against any such approach to his own
work.[^7]

The second major problem with scholarship on Prynne appears as a bias
against consideration of the very earliest stages of his career, and
therefore, in combination with the focus on text over context, against
the influences that shaped that part of his career. The precise details
of this bias will be considered in the introduction to Chapter 1, but it
is important at this stage to take account of what it obscures. For many
critics of Prynne’s work, his poetic career is taken to begin in earnest
with 1968’s *Kitchen Poems*; that is to say, Prynne’s deliberate
suppression of his debut collection, *Force of Circumstance*, is
accepted relatively unproblematically. Counterintuitively, this would be
less of a problem for Prynne scholarship in general if *Force of
Circumstance* was more similar in style to the later work. As it stands,
the sense that the book is an obvious outlier leads to an unjustifiable
hypostatisation of the break that follows its publication. A seemingly
unbreachable wall having been erected between *Force of Circumstance*
and what follows it, everything associated with the book is left on the
far side, presumed to be irrelevant to the later work. As will be argued
in Chapter 1, the fact that this shift in Prynne’s work—and it is
certainly an important shift—coincides with his increasing receptivity
to American poetry has the effect of ‘nationalising’ the respective
parts of his career, with certain English contexts being ignored, even
where they might shed new light on much of what Prynne was writing
throughout the later 1960s and ’70s.

In order to counter the two problems identified above—a focus on text
over context and a reluctance to consider the earliest phase of Prynne’s
career—this thesis will concentrate almost exclusively on Prynne’s prose
work rather than his poetry. Such a drastic restriction in scope
requires some justification. It is important to emphasise from the
outset that this is primarily a methodological decision rather than a
choice about content. In other words, while certain prose pieces will be
read in detail, and their status as prose made an object of analysis,
this is not intended to be a thesis *about* Prynne’s prose. Rather, it
is a thesis which adopts Prynne’s prose as a tool—one among many—to
explore the broader contexts of his literary career. There are two
characteristics which make the prose a particularly effective tool for
this job. At the most basic level, Prynne’s prose writing is
significantly more transparent to contextual analysis than his poetry.
While the style is in some cases just as obscure, this is not usually
the case. Furthermore, Prynne’s prose pieces tend to be tied much more
obviously to specific occasions of composition and publication, e.g. as
book reviews, letters in response to recent articles, or syntheses of
pre-existing scholarship, than do his poems, allowing analysis to extend
outwards into these contexts without encountering major barriers to
understanding.[^8] The relative lack of existing critical work on
Prynne’s prose also allows these pieces to escape the often too rigid
periodising of his career that attends analysis of the poetry.

Critical discussion of Prynne’s prose work has generally been undertaken
as a means of entry to the poetry. One of the most frequently discussed
works is the very early piece ‘Resistance and Difficulty’, in which
Prynne presents a theory of poetic difficulty influenced by contemporary
phenomenology. This work has been considered at length in Ph.D. theses
by Marriott, Sutherland, Dobran and Nandini Ramesh Sankar.[^9] Simon
Jarvis engages with a similarly early piece, ‘The Elegiac World in
Victorian Poetry’, in a recent essay on rhyme.[^10] A more regularly
cited work is ‘A Note on Metal’, first published in *The English
Intelligencer* and subsequently printed in pamphlet form alongside the
poem ‘Aristeas, in Seven Years’ before being included in *Poems*. This
piece has been discussed briefly by Jarvis, Robin Purves, Reitha
Pattison, Latter and Nicholas Royle, and more substantially by Seeta
Chaganti and C.D. Blanton.[^11] Johansson, Jow Lindsay, Justin Katko and
others have written on ‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’, whose
inclusion in the collected poems has—as with ‘A Note on Metal’—led to
some confusion over its poetic/prosaic status, while Gerald Bruns, in a
recent *Chicago Review* article, further complicates the poetry/prose
distinction with reference to *Kazoo Dreamboats* (2011).[^12] Prynne’s
1993 lecture-essay *Stars, Tigers and the Shape of Words*, which deals
with the linguistic problem of arbitrariness, has received wider
attention than many of his earlier works, being cited by Charles
Bernstein, Edward Nye and Derek Attridge; meanwhile, his slightly later
‘Discourse on Willem de Kooning’s *Rosy-Fingered Dawn at Louse Point*’
has proved useful to scholars of de Kooning and Frank O’Hara, notably
Lytle Shaw and Sam Ladkin, as well as to those with a more contemporary
focus such as Peter Middleton.[^13] A more recent jumping-off point for
analysis of Prynne’s poetry, as well as broader linguistic and
phonological issues, is provided by ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, which
has been discussed by Attridge and Lacy Rumsey.[^14] Christopher Nealon
also uses a number of Prynne’s prose works to support his argument in
‘The Prynne Reflex’, but does not consider any in great detail.[^15]

Recalling one of a number of visits to Ezra Pound during his
incarceration at St Elizabeth’s Hospital in the late 1940s, Charles
Olson writes that ‘I asked him if anybody had commented on his prose. He
started out to say plenty, but I saw he meant the subject matter, and I
stopped him, and meant as language, but that was the end of the
interview.’[^16] While the review above is admittedly partial, focussing
on texts which will be considered in the present thesis, it is
nevertheless representative enough to make clear that the situation in
Prynne’s case is worse, with very little commentary existing on either
the content *or* the language of his prose work. While the pieces can be
assigned roughly to the periods of Prynne’s poetic work by their dates
of composition, this operation is for the most part not justified by
analysis of the texts themselves. The freedom which this situation
allows will be particularly evident in Chapter 1, in which prose from
the early stages of Prynne’s career is discussed in order to gain a
clearer picture of his early influences than that which emerges from the
poetry alone. Through the use both of published pieces and of archival
material such as letters, which fall under this thesis’s definition of
prose, an idiosyncratic and specifically British intellectual *milieu*
anchored by the work of Donald Davie and F.R. Leavis is proposed as an
important and hitherto overlooked context for Prynne’s early work. This
context is then connected to a conception of the academy, and the
University of Cambridge in particular, which, it is claimed, extends
throughout Prynne’s career. In the first half of Chapter 2, a similar
strategy is used to illuminate the little magazine scene which served as
a conduit for so much of Prynne’s poetry and prose throughout the 1960s
and ’70s. As in Chapter 1, attention is paid to activities which blur
the boundary between what is generally considered to be Prynne’s
juvenilia and the work of his mature career, while a focus on material
practices and contexts is maintained. The second half of this chapter,
by contrast, accepts the textual focus of current Prynne scholarship,
but turns this attitude in the direction of a prose text, undertaking an
extended reading of Prynne’s 1967 piece ‘A Note on Metal’ and exploring
questions about the nature of his prose work in detail. Finally, Chapter
3 turns to prose fiction, proposing a third key context for Prynne’s
work in the writing of Wyndham Lewis, Edward Upward and Douglas Oliver.
These three authors are claimed to occupy a loose tradition into which
Prynne also intervenes with his 1974 text ‘The *Plant Time Manifold*
Transcripts’. As in Chapters 1 and 2, Prynne’s letters, published and
unpublished, are used to support the idea of a coherent context for his
work, while potential rifts and inconsistencies are also acknowledged.
This thesis is thus structured in a roughly tripartite fashion, with the
mid-point of the second chapter signalling a shift from the contextual
to the textual, while the final chapter incorporates both modes of
analysis. Allied to this structure is a broad movement from the
descriptive to the argumentative and evaluative as the work progresses.

In-keeping with the largely contextual focus of this thesis, the choice
of the period 1955–75 as its object of study was made by looking
simultaneously at the internal contours of Prynne’s career and at events
outside it. The concept of ‘the Long Sixties’, defined roughly as the
period 1958–74, is familiar from the work of Arthur Marwick, and just as
in Marwick’s model the initial date of this thesis’s expanded scope is
firmer than its endpoint.[^17] 1955 was Prynne’s final year at school;
it is also the date of his earliest recorded poem, and of his first
involvement with a little magazine, as editor of the sixth-form journal
which published it, a position which will be examined in Chapter 2.[^18]
In broader historical terms, any number of factors could be cited to
support a case for 1955 as the beginning of an era in which the cultural
emphasis in Britain came to rest firmly on the first rather than the
second part of the phrase ‘post-war’: ten years on from the Second World
War’s formal end, the first full year without rationing also saw the
symbolically important resignation of Winston Churchill as Prime
Minister, to be replaced by Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden. Perhaps more
importantly for the concerns of this thesis, D.J. Enright’s anthology
*Poets of the 1950s* was published in 1955, solidifying the poetic
infrastructure of ‘the Movement’ which, as Chapter 1 will argue, helped
to determine the course of Prynne’s early career.[^19] As acknowledged
above, 1975 is weaker than 1955 as a point of periodisation;
nevertheless, it has some key virtues. According with the terminal point
given by Mellors for ‘late modernism’ (1945–1975), it includes Prynne’s
significant collection *Wound Response* (1974) and its associated prose
text, ‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’, a work which Chapter 3
will argue is highly representative of tendencies present in other prose
fiction published throughout this period.[^20] Importantly for the
largely British focus of this thesis, 1975 also marks the first
appearance of Prynne’s poetry in a language other than English, with the
publication of Bernard Dubourg’s French translations of *Kitchen Poems*,
*Day Light Songs* and *Fire Lizard*.[^21] This introduction of Prynne’s
work to continental Europe fits neatly with the British electorate’s
decision of the same year in favour of the United Kingdom’s continued
membership of the Common Market, a vote which has until recent events
been taken as a mandate for involvement in the European Communities’
associated and successor institutions.

Inevitably, there are relevant areas of enquiry which, primarily for
reasons of space, this thesis is not able to pursue. The first of these
is Prynne’s relation to the concept of the nation in general, and the
United Kingdom in particular. This thesis generally uses the terms
‘England’ and ‘English’ when referring to poets born, living or writing
in England and ‘Britain’ or ‘British’ when referring to the state,
acknowledging the existence of culturally distinct poetic traditions in
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. This is not to deny the many
geographic rifts within England as a cultural entity, but the fact that
England is in the present work generally used in broad-brush opposition
to the concept of ‘America’ justifies a degree of generalisation. In any
case, Prynne’s Englishness (though not necessarily his *idea* of it)
fits for the most part within a Home Counties, Received Pronunciation,
public school–Oxbridge, BBC model which for the bulk of the period under
study here remained culturally hegemonic. Adding to the pressures
against including a detailed study of nationhood in this thesis is the
fact that these issues were considered at length in the author’s own
M.Phil. dissertation, and while some of its conclusions would be
dissented from in the present context, the evidence and analysis on
which they are based would not.[^22] The other topic largely absent from
this thesis is less straightforward. The study of Prynne’s prose was
compared above to the study of Ezra Pound’s, but this is far from being
the only point of connection between the two men. In fact, the figure of
Pound could be said to haunt every one of the following chapters. The
vitriolic and polemical tone of Prynne’s critical writing and
correspondence, discussed in relation to Leavis in Chapter 1, has a
lineage which could equally—perhaps even more justifiably—be traced to
Pound. Like Pound, Prynne has acted as a sort of poetic impresario for
friends and acquaintances, a set of activities which is considered in
Chapter 1 and the first half of Chapter 2. Even Prynne’s discussion of
the relation between abstraction, corruption and value in ‘A Note on
Metal’, considered at length in the second half of the latter chapter,
has shades of Pound’s economic thought, and while Chapter 3 does engage
briefly with Pound on a direct level, this is subordinated to a focus on
Wyndham Lewis. It would be misleading to claim that Pound is excluded
from the body of this thesis for the same reason that it does not
include detailed studies of Olson and Ed Dorn—namely, that he is an
American. Pound’s long-term expatriate status would make such an
exclusion problematic, to say the least. The real reason is again one of
space. To provide a full account of Prynne’s relation to Pound would
(and perhaps one day will) be the task of an entire thesis, not merely a
section of one. As the subtitle of Mellors’s *Late Modernist Poetics:
From Pound to Prynne* indicates, some of this work has already been
done, but not to an extent which would prevent other important material
from being crowded out in a work as short as this one. Mellors’s focus,
moreover, is primarily on the cultural transmission of a particular
understanding of myth, rather than on broader structural and
sociological similarities between his three main subjects: Pound, Olson
and Prynne. The figure of Pound will, nevertheless, be brought back to
the surface in this thesis’s conclusion, used to draw together and
reflect on the foregoing analysis. \newpage

Chapter 1. ‘The contemporary situation here in England’
=======================================================

i. Introduction
---------------

When the most basic and accessible introductions to Prynne’s work seek
to identify his influences, the two figures who appear more than any
others are the British poet Donald Davie, one of Prynne’s academic
supervisors, and the American poet Charles Olson, with whom Prynne
corresponded throughout the 1960s.[^23] Yet the relationship between the
citations is in most cases highly unequal. Prynne’s entry in *The
Concise Oxford Companion to English Literature* is characteristic: ‘His
first collection, *Force of Circumstance and Other Poems* (1962; later
suppressed), bore similarities to Donald Davie’s gently modernist
Movement poetry, but his subsequent involvement in the British Poetry
Revival exposed his work to the legacy of American Objectivism,
particularly Charles Olson, and shifted it in a more experimental
direction.’[^24] Leaving aside the misleading reference to the ‘British
Poetry Revival’—a term coined by Eric Mottram and more often associated
with London-based poets involved with the Poetry Society in the
1970s—the dual purpose of this sentence, epitomised by the casually
parenthetical ‘1962; later suppressed’, is clear: to acknowledge the
importance of Davie to Prynne’s early poetry while cordoning off the
later work, safely insulating it from any implication of further
influence.[^25] Unlike Olson, Davie is only ‘gently’ modernist; Prynne,
meanwhile, is a sort of poetic negative who is ‘exposed’ to the blinding
light from across the Atlantic and thereby fundamentally ‘shifted’,
never able to return to his previous form. Prynne’s implied designation
of his debut collection as juvenilia, excluding it from every volume of
his collected poems up to and including the recent third Bloodaxe
edition, is in this way accepted as a factually correct
literary-historical judgement rather than a highly contentious attempt
at personal canon-formation, and figures associated with the work—not
only Davie, but also Charles Tomlinson—are consigned to the same ash
heap.[^26]

If basic reference works downplay Davie as an influence, the more
sophisticated scholarly perspective on Prynne’s poetic development moves
him even further out of view. Despite the relative infancy of academic
work on Prynne, a number of clear conventions can already be discerned.
One of the most important of these is the view that Prynne’s 1971
collection *Brass* marks a significant shift—perhaps the most
significant shift—in his poetic development. As Sutherland notes in his
own 2004 account of the book, ‘\[a\]ll published accounts of *Brass* are
agreed on one point: as Ian Patterson says, “Brass … is a transitional
work.”’[^27] He goes on to cite Reeve and Kerridge’s *Nearly Too Much*,
which as the first widely available, book-length study of Prynne’s work
has exerted a strong influence on subsequent reception, as well as David
Trotter’s *The Making of the Reader* (1984), which Sutherland describes
as ‘\[p\]erhaps the most influential account’ of the shift. Sutherland
himself disagrees at length with the specifics of these accounts, but he
does not dispute the substantive point that a change took place in
Prynne’s work, arguing instead that it can be detected as early as *The
White Stones* (1969). Whether or not this second shift in Prynne’s work
is attributed directly to his loss of contact with Olson and the
latter’s subsequent death, and whether it occurs neatly between *The
White Stones* and *Brass* or runs like a fault line through the former
collection, it has the effect of relegating the work of the early 1960s
from the position of subordinate term in a binary hierarchy to effective
invisibility within a model of Prynne’s career that is formally ternary
but is in critical practice still composed of two parts: early and
mature.[^28] More recent investigations into what has been described as
Prynne’s ‘late style’—notably a special edition of the journal *Hix
Eros* compiled following a symposium on the topic in 2013—threaten to
push this work even further into obscurity.[^29]

Davie is not the only figure to suffer from the lack of scholarship on
Prynne’s work in the first half of the 1960s: with notable exceptions
such as Steve Clark’s highly polemical ‘Prynne and the Movement’, there
appears to be a general bias against consideration of indigenous
influences in work on Prynne’s early career.[^30] It is true that Prynne
has described the prevailing poetic climate during his school and
college years as ‘a kind of wasteland’, and it would of course be
misleading to insist that his intellectual relationship with, say,
Charles Tomlinson is as significant to the development of his poetry and
prose as his relationships with Olson and, later, Ed Dorn.[^31]
Nevertheless, it is important to recognise the extent to which the
prevailing scholarly focus on the transatlantic bridge represented by
Prynne’s contact with the latter two figures is conditioned by what are
essentially archival contingencies—notably, the presence of hundreds of
letters from Prynne to Olson and Dorn in a well-known and easily
accessible collection at the University of Connecticut.[^32] It is
possible to hazard a general law of modern literary history, according
to which physical distance between poets—with its concomitants, greater
reliance on written correspondence and a stronger tendency to prize and
therefore preserve letters received—tends to promote the visibility of
the relationship in subsequent scholarship.[^33] The opposite case
clearly applies to Davie, with whom Prynne must have had dozens of
meetings which have left no written trace, aside from the brief
reference to ‘conversations with J.H. Prynne’ in the acknowledgements to
Davie’s 1964 book on Ezra Pound.[^34]

If a reliable account of Prynne’s entire career is eventually to be
produced, the bias described here will need to be rectified, or at least
compensated for. The following chapter will therefore concentrate
directly on the very earliest years of Prynne’s career, beginning with
his matriculation at the University of Cambridge in 1957. It will
examine his relationship with Davie in detail, comparing it with the
equivalent relationship between Davie and Charles Tomlinson and
considering the effect on Prynne of Davie’s involvement with the
Movement, the poetic group anchored by Philip Larkin and Kingsley Amis.
It will then make a more extended case for a third significant influence
that has so far gone almost entirely unacknowledged: F.R. Leavis.

ii. Donald Davie and Charles Tomlinson
--------------------------------------

Though this chapter will argue that Donald Davie was an extremely
important figure during Prynne’s early years at Cambridge, he was not a
permanent fixture. Prynne matriculated at Jesus College at the beginning
of the 1957–58 academic year, a period in which Davie was a visiting
professor at the University of California. Only the following year did
Davie return to Cambridge, where he had completed his undergraduate
studies and Ph.D. in the late 1940s and early ’50s respectively, and it
was not until 1959 that he was made a fellow of Gonville and Caius
College.[^35] Alex Latter describes how Prynne’s transfer to Davie’s
supervision was the result of direct lobbying by Prynne and R.F.
Langley, a fellow student on the English course at Jesus and later an
important poet in his own right.[^36] Though the dates for the move are
unclear, it seems likely, given Davie’s academic position and the
structure of the Cambridge English Tripos, that he only supervised
Prynne for the third and final year of the course, known as Part II.
Even so, in order to catch Prynne’s attention as a potential supervisor,
some sense of Davie’s basic scholarly and poetic approach must already
have filtered down to him. Before examining Prynne’s recorded comments
on Davie, it may therefore be helpful to sketch a brief outline of the
older poet’s public image in the mid-to-late 1950s, to give an idea of
the sort of figure that Prynne and Langley hoped to encounter.

Writing in the postscript to the 1976 reprint of *Articulate Energy*,
Davie describes his first book of criticism—1952’s *Purity of Diction in
English Verse*—as ‘a thinly disguised manifesto’.[^37] A glance at the
book’s introduction makes clear what he means: having described the
‘peculiar discomfort’ felt when reading verse whose language is
‘impure’, he goes on to claim that while ‘\[t\]his criterion is not
equally relevant to all sorts of English poetry or in all phases of the
English tradition’, it is ‘relevant, indeed indispensable, to the poetry
of Goldsmith’s contemporaries, and to that of my own.’[^38] The
polemical purpose of *Purity of Diction* is evidently to legitimise
through literary-historical reference Davie’s own restrained, broadly
anti-modernist poetic practice in this period—‘taking sides’, as he
tentatively puts it, ‘with Pope and Yeats and perhaps Auden, against
Pound and perhaps Eliot.’[^39] This unabashedly conservative attitude is
typical of what led Davie to be categorised, in a 1954 *Spectator*
leader article that has become a staple of critical accounts, as a
member of the Movement.[^40] Yet despite being included in both of this
nascent grouping’s seminal anthologies—D.J. Enright’s *Poets of the
1950s* (1955) and Robert Conquest’s *New Lines* (1956)—it was clear that
Davie’s poetry was never as representative of the tendency as that of,
say, Larkin, Amis or John Wain. This fact was raised in 1957 in a
blistering review of *New Lines* by Davie’s former student, Charles
Tomlinson, who noted that ‘Mr. Davie’s close association in the public
mind with the middlebrows (“the Wain-Amis-Davie school”, *The Listener*
calls the new poetry) is \[…\] difficult to account for.’[^41] In 1959,
Davie raised this implicit divergence to the level of a public break
with his short essay ‘Remembering the Movement’, which denounced the
whole thing as a sort of publicity exercise, though one of which the key
participants claimed strenuously to be ignorant.[^42] Perhaps most
tellingly, the dustjacket of his next full-length collection, which
comprised poems written between 1957 and 1963, declared that ‘\[i\]n
these poems Donald Davie abandons certain features of his writing which
have attracted notice in his earlier volumes. In particular he now
eschews for the most part the use of irony, nostalgia, and literary
allusions.’[^43]

A reading of one poem from the book, ‘Housekeeping’, will show how
necessary the qualification ‘for the most part’ is to this description.
For one thing, the poem is absolutely nostalgic in tone. Davie begins
abruptly with the chronological locator ‘From thirty years back’,
describing a childhood scene of ‘my grandmother with us boys | Picking
the ash-grimed blackberries’.[^44] To recall an event from childhood is
not automatically to be nostalgic—nevertheless, Davie’s tone as the poem
progresses makes clear that this is the mode in which it is to be read.
The poem’s central subject is Davie’s grandmother’s migration from
Somerset to Yorkshire in the 1890s: how ‘\[s\]he toiled, my father a
baby, through the hard | Fellside winters, to Barnsley’. This is
expressed through the conceit of the characteristic noises she makes
while picking blackberries having ‘carried’ across the distance between
the two counties, and subsequently through time to Davie as speaker:
‘Contentment cries from the distance. How it carries!’ Describing how
his grandmother was ‘\[t\]ranslated in youth past any hope of
returning’, Davie brings this very ‘hope’ into play, presenting the
distance between his Barnsley childhood and his present condition (Davie
wrote the poem while living in Italy) as analogous to that between the
West Country and northern England.

It would, however, be misleading to characterise ‘Housekeeping’ as a
simple expression of *Heimweh*, though this is undoubtedly one of its
roles. The poem is also a vehicle for Davie’s own self-presentation, a
function which is accomplished through the strategic use of a certain
narrative tone—if not quite ‘ironic’, then certainly urbane and knowing.
This tone can be detected most clearly in the poem’s third stanza:

> \singlespacing How the sound carries! Whatever the dried-out, lank\
> Sticks of poor trees could say of the slow slag stealing\
> More berries than we did, I hear her still down the bank\
> Slide, knickers in evidence, laughing, modestly squealing.

\noindent The most obtrusive aspect of this stanza is the concluding
clause, in which the speaker deliberately collides two equally
patronising images of the poem’s subject: Davie’s grandmother squeals
like a pig, but ‘modestly’, as befits a family matriarch who spent the
prime of her life in ‘the ‘nineties’. The phrase nevertheless succeeds
in distancing the speaker from his grandmother, thereby playing into the
poem’s broader purpose: to allow Davie, well-known poet and Cambridge
don, to celebrate his provincial origins while reassuring his audience
that he has transcended them, and crucially that they do not exert any
involuntary influence on his poetic work. This deliberate disjunction of
form and content, in which the former neutralises and controls the
latter, is visible in another phrase from this line, ‘knickers in
evidence’. It is not entirely clear whether this is a genuine
Davie-ism—an artefact of his infamously pedantic style—or a deliberate
parody of the sort of semi-euphemistic working or lower-middle class
speech that his grandmother herself may have used (something akin to the
compensatory latinity of ‘serviette’ as opposed to ‘napkin’, or the
hyper-technicality attributed to mid-century sergeant majors: ‘never say
“pull the trigger” when you might say “depress the mechanism”’[^45]).
Either way, it serves to place the speaker in a superior discursive
position—the only question is *how* superior.

‘Housekeeping’ is definitely nostalgic and potentially ironic. Does it
also infringe Davie’s third ban, on the use of literary allusions?
According to Davie’s own comments during a 1963 reading at the
University of Cincinnati, it does. Introducing the poem, he reveals that
it ‘has quite a close relation to a specific poem among those \[…\] by
Boris Pasternak, which I was translating at the time.’[^46] Davie is
referring to the poems which form the concluding section of Pasternak’s
novel *Doctor Zhivago*, of which his translation was published in
1965.[^47] Far from being an invisible link, and thus not strictly an
allusion at all, this relation is presumed by Davie to be visible (with
some prompting) to his audience: ‘Those of you who know Pasternak’s
*Doctor Zhivago*, with the poems at the end in the of course inadequate
translation, may like to ask yourselves which of Pasternak’s poems it
was that sparked this one off as far as I’m concerned.’[^48]
‘Housekeeping’ is certainly not representative of *Events & Wisdoms* as
a whole, but neither is it completely anomalous, and the fact that it
fails so obviously to conform to what is presumably Davie’s own
description of the volume—a collection which ‘eschews for the most part
the use of irony, nostalgia, and literary allusions’—suggests a real gap
between his ambitions and his poetic achievements in this period. This
analysis is confirmed in startlingly blunt terms by a November 1958
entry in Davie’s personal journal. Having recounted a conversation with
George MacBeth in which ‘modern Franco-American poetic’ was dismissed,
Davie makes the ambivalent nature of his own position clear: ‘I come
round to thinking that \[…\] many of the sincerely self-professed
champions of poetry are in fact its worst enemies. My own prolonged
schizophrenia—between \[Yvor\] Winters on the one hand, Pound &
Tomlinson on the other—at this point enters on a crucial phrase.’[^49]

On returning to Cambridge in 1958, then, it seems fair to say that Davie
was in a liminal position, having shifted away from the Movement in
intention but having not yet confirmed this shift in practice or in
considered public statement. The most fertile source of information on
Prynne’s attitude to Davie is his correspondence of the 1960s—not only
the letters to Olson and Dorn, but also those to Peter Riley, as well as
three short airmail letters sent to Cid Corman in 1961. By the same
token, the collation and comparison of comments made to diverse
correspondents sheds light on the differences in these relationships,
and on Prynne’s approach to letter-writing itself. Prynne’s earliest
remarks about Davie come in a November 1961 letter to Corman, in the
context of a sustained comparison of the English and North American
poetry scenes, to the detriment of the former. Having enquired in an
earlier letter after potential American contributors to *Prospect*, the
little magazine which he had recently taken over from Elaine Feinstein
and Tony Ward, Prynne laments the ‘total collapse of a singable idiom’
in England, which has encouraged the emergence of ‘\[d\]ecorous
poltroons on all sides: small, cautious and dead.’ After praising
Charles Tomlinson’s work as ‘truly the nearest to stirrings’, Prynne
seems to consign Davie to the ‘poltroon’ category: ‘Just look at Davie’s
recent *A Sequence for Francis Parkman*—such muscle-bound gesticulation
is rife. Look at Gunn.’[^50] The collocation with Thom Gunn is
particularly telling, suggesting that Prynne did not consider Davie’s
poetic work of the late 1950s and early ’60s to have shifted as
decisively from its Movement origins as Davie himself did. Yet even at
this early stage, there is a sense of obligation to the older poet—in an
asterisked note to the above comment, Prynne acknowledges that ‘Prospect
will have to carry a review \[…\]—pressures inherited that I can’t
side-step.’[^51] It is not immediately obvious what Prynne means by
‘muscle-bound gesticulation’, though the phrase bears a resemblance to
his 1962 condemnation of ‘the deliberately small aims and over-developed
musculature of most English writers of verse’.[^52] It is perhaps
relevant that *A Sequence for Francis Parkman* is Davie’s most explicit
attempt to bridge the transatlantic gap that Prynne was himself
struggling with in this period, its dedicatee being the celebrated
nineteenth-century author of *The Oregon Trail*. Writing in a note to
the sequence in his 1972 *Collected Poems*, Davie describes it as ‘my
response to North America on my first visit’, and the overall tone is
one of simultaneous fascination and alienation.[^53] In the sequence’s
final poem as published, a verse letter to the Yeats scholar Curtis
Bradford, Davie asks a series of questions about American history before
admitting that he can ‘only guess, | I guess at it out of my Englishness
| And envy you out of England.’[^54] A further poem, added to the
sequence in the collected edition but not present in the original book,
is even more forceful in its self-hating Englishness (or Britishness):
‘Anglophobia rises | In Brooklyn to hysteria | At some British verses. |
British, one sympathizes.’[^55] It seems possible that Prynne’s
antipathy towards the sequence stems not from its misdirected energy, as
might be the case with some of Davie’s earlier work, but from its
anaemic, small-island handling of subject matter explored so much more
vitally by poets such as Dorn and Olson. Davie has poetic muscles of a
sort, but he is using them simply to gesticulate rather than to deliver
the knock-out punch.[^56]

Prynne’s next comment on Davie, in an April 1962 letter to Dorn, is much
more positive: relaying Davie’s approval of Dorn’s *The Newly Fallen*—‘I
don’t know when I enjoyed reading a collection of poems so much as
Edward Dorn’s’—Prynne describes it as ‘an encouraging comment from an
academic of such intelligence and standing as him.’[^57] While this
change might cynically be attributed to Prynne’s hopes of securing a
fellowship at Caius in the following months (he was, with Davie’s help,
elected fellow of Caius in October 1962), it might equally result from
the structure of the letter: there would seem to be little point in
relaying a compliment from somebody while simultaneously declaring them
an idiot.[^58] Prynne’s next letter to Dorn, in July, helpfully
clarifies the evident ambivalence of his position *vis-à-vis* Davie,
contrasting the latter’s declared critical stance in ‘Remembering the
Movement’ with what Prynne sees as the still ‘crippled’ state of his
poetry: Davie is presented—to use his own terminology—as a schizophrenic
figure, apparently aware of what needs to be done in the new poetry of
the 1960s but unable to do it himself. Prynne quotes Davie’s
characterisation of the typical Movement poet as ‘never so surrendered
to his experience, never so far gone out of himself in his response, as
not to be aware of the attitudes he is taking up’, writing that ‘Davie’s
own writing is crippled with this sense of the larger social context,
his desire to include all his reservations within the scope of what
small conviction he can command.’[^59] He admits that Davie ‘has visions
of the nobility of the poet’s responsibility’, giving 1959’s *The
Forests of Lithuania* as an example, but contends that ‘he cannot see
this as other than an interpreter’s function—to speak out and make plain
what is true of the public context in which we live.’[^60] It is odd to
see Prynne seeming to deny that ‘the public context in which we live’ is
a legitimate subject for poetry when his next collection, *Kitchen
Poems* (1968), would deal directly with the human subject’s imbrication
in the very public contexts of global finance and politics. It is
probable, therefore, that he means something different by the phrase;
perhaps something similar to the debased sociality to which Davie admits
paying tribute through ‘inert gestures of social adaptiveness—“no
doubt”, “I suppose”, “of course”, “almost”, “perhaps”’.[^61] This is
absolutely to be distinguished from, for example, the metaphysical
emphasis on ‘discretion’ in Prynne’s ‘A Gold Ring Called Reluctance’, a
poem which claims that ‘\[t\]he public | is no more than a sign on the
outside of the | shopping-bag’.[^62] When we encounter the ‘inert
gestures’ of ‘Have | you had enough? Do have a little more? | It’s very
good but, no, perhaps I won’t’ in this context, they are very obviously
shaded with sarcasm, whereas in Davie’s poetry they retain their primary
function as ‘poetic socializing’—what John Press described in 1963 as
‘vaguely reassuring gesture\[s\] intended to show that these highly
intellectual poets want their readers to relax and feel at home in a
genial atmosphere.’[^63]

For Prynne in the early 1960s, Davie’s receptivity to American poetry
had its uses, particularly when combined with the public profile that he
had earned in the course of the previous decade. Writing to Olson in
November 1962, Prynne describes his plans—in retrospect too
optimistic—to print Dorn’s *Hands Up!* in England, noting that ‘I have
induced Donald Davie to like it, and he is a figure of such authority in
these matters that we should be able to find a publisher without too
much difficulty.’[^64] Discussing the same subject with Dorn in
December, he describes how the manuscript has been sent to the London
publisher Routledge & Kegan Paul, ‘since both I and Davie have had work
published there and know the man in question \[Colin Franklin\].’[^65]
In an extraordinary letter to Dorn earlier the same month, Prynne makes
Davie’s usefulness as a mouthpiece for American poetry explicit: ‘He is
an energetic propagandist, and has a chance of being heard (which I do
not), so that a change of wind may be just possibly in the offing here;
he has certainly singled out \[Robert\] Creeley’s collection as one of
the year’s most exciting books in another piece he is doing for *The
Guardian*.’[^66] The tone here is like a less direct and militaristic
version of that adopted by Amis in his most mercenary letters during the
ascendancy of the Movement, as when he wrote to Wain in November 1953 to
summarise recent developments in the literary press, concluding that
‘with you as general, the boys could move right into control.’[^67]
Further evidence of a coordinated PR campaign is provided in an April
1963 letter to Dorn, by which point Prynne had abandoned hope of placing
*Hands Up!* with Routledge:

> \singlespacing So I now have my eye on Eyre & Spottiswoode, who have
> published American verse and would also be interested in the novel
> \[*The Rites of Passage*\]. I am waiting for Donald’s return from
> Cincinnati (this week) to plan another set of tactics, and hope you
> will bear with the delays. \[…\] Meanwhile Donald (with prompting)
> will I trust continue to scatter hints in the forum, like this one in
> a *New Statesman* review of Spender’s new and worthless book.[^68]

\noindent Davie’s review, a cutting of which is pasted into the letter,
combines Movement-style antipathy towards Stephen Spender, Dylan Thomas
and anyone else associated with the 1940s with enthusiasm for ‘the
theories of Olson and the poems of Creeley and Edward Dorn \[which\]
seem to show the Modern Movement entering, in America, on a new lease of
unexpected life.’[^69]

Despite Davie’s evident willingness to cooperate in the promotion of
Olson and Dorn to English readers in the early 1960s, Prynne’s tone when
referring to him is frequently patronising. In the 10 December letter
referred to above, Prynne writes of Davie as if he is one of his
students, complaining that ‘he knows almost nothing of what is really
new in America at this time, but I am working steadily at him’.[^70] At
other points, however, Prynne admits to a certain respect for his former
supervisor. Writing to Olson at around the same time as he is
coordinating the Eyre & Spottiswoode campaign, Prynne refers to Davie as
‘a colleague and a close friend of mine here’, and by 1965, after Davie
had secured Dorn a teaching post at the new University of Essex, he is
ready to describe him as ‘the most intellectually and personally
honourable man I’ve ever met in the knowledge industry (or the adjacent
masquerades). I owe him much more than I can easily say, even though we
don’t really know each other very well and he has a certain robust sense
of distance’.[^71] This ambivalence is maintained throughout the decade.
Writing to Peter Riley in August 1967, Prynne makes a joke about Davie’s
irrelevance, declaring that ‘Andrew \[Crozier\] must be in a complete
mental haze if he thinks sending a copy \[of a recent book\] to Donald
Davie would be interesting—maybe to the Sports Editor of *The Times* as
well.’[^72] Yet when Davie makes his momentous move to the United States
the following year, Prynne admits to Riley that ‘I am very deeply torn
apart \[…\] (most obscurely) by Donald Davie’s translation to Stanford
Cal.’[^73] Prynne’s ambivalence towards Davie was described above as
stemming from the aesthetic gap between the latter’s poetic theory and
his poetic practice; yet the tone of this last comment, not to mention
Prynne’s apparent confusion about his own position, suggests that
something more may be at stake.

In order to clarify Prynne’s poetic and academic relationship with
Davie, it may help to compare it to Davie’s superficially very similar
relationship with Charles Tomlinson. Davie had supervised Tomlinson at
the turn of the 1950s during his first stint at Cambridge. In a 1998
*Paris Review* interview, Tomlinson recalls that ‘\[m\]y final year at
Cambridge was a compensation for my first. I acquired a new supervisor,
a young man just returned from service at sea, and this was Donald
Davie. We went on to educate each other and ultimately to criticize each
other’s verse.’[^74] That Prynne enjoyed a similarly free relationship
with Davie is suggested by an account of the activities of the Jesus
College Literary Society, printed in the college’s annual report for
1959. Prynne served as secretary of this society for the 1958–59
academic year, with his college tutor, the biologist and
ethnomusicologist Laurence Picken, serving as president. Given that the
report refers to Picken in the third person, it is likely that it was
written by Prynne, and its tone is therefore of interest. Having
recounted a number of the society’s events for the year, the account
describes how

> \singlespacing Dr \[David\] Daiches introduced the poetry of Wallace
> Stevens to an audience largely unacquainted with the extent of his
> work, and Dr Davie presented a most forceful case for the major
> stature of Ezra Pound’s *Cantos* against the concerted reluctance of a
> section of the audience to admit anything of the sort. We hasten to
> reassure Dr Davie, however, that things may not be as bad as they must
> have seemed.[^75]

\noindent While brief, this account carries a clear sense of scholarly
community: an implication, particularly in the gentle humour of the
final sentence, that the undergraduate may speak on equal terms with the
celebrated poet.

As noted above, Tomlinson’s eventual break with Davie was public, though
not therefore permanent. His attack on *New Lines*, titled ‘The
Middlebrow Muse’, was printed in *Essays in Criticism* in 1957, the year
that he was hired by the English department at the University of
Bristol, where he would remain for the rest of his career. Writing from
this relatively secure position—the preceding years had been spent
travelling in Italy and teaching in a primary school—Tomlinson was
apparently unhampered by professional squeamishness, attacking
Conquest’s anthology in no uncertain terms. As with many assaults on the
Movement, one of Tomlinson’s key targets is their apparent collusion
with the popular press: he describes how ‘the new type of poet’ has been
advertised in publications ranging from ‘the *Times Educational
Supplement* to the *Daily Express*’, a spectrum calculated to shore up
their characterisation as ’middlebrow’.[^76] The anthology’s
contributors are then summarily dismissed: Wain is a purveyor of
‘Hollywoodese’, Amis a philistine, Gunn a wannabe tough guy, and
Conquest lives up to his name by ‘offer\[ing\] us in his own poetry a
rather blatant parade of his sexual adequacy.’ Enright is afforded
lengthier consideration, but only the more forcefully to label him a
‘journalist in verse’.[^77] Aside from some similarly dismissive
comments about Larkin and Elizabeth Jennings, much of the rest of the
review is devoted to considering how far Davie’s work exceeds the bounds
of the anthology, Tomlinson accusing Conquest of having selected the
least interesting and most typically Movement-esque poems in order to
construct a false harmony between the contributors. Davie is apparently
‘the only poet in this volume whose work, after worrying signs of
metrical restraint, promises a real development away from his earlier
manner’, though he is kept in his place as ‘a good but minor poet’.[^78]
Tomlinson ends up declaring that ‘there is not a great deal in
Mr. Conquest’s anthology outside the range of an average talent with
some leisure and within reach of an English faculty library’, before
concluding with a Leavisian lament over ‘the gradual disappearance of
objective values in our criticism.’[^79]

What is striking about Tomlinson’s position in the context of this
thesis is its effective mirroring of Prynne’s own attitude to Davie.
Where Prynne sees Davie as acknowledging in his prose—particularly in
‘Remembering the Movement’—what he fails to break away from in his
poetry, Tomlinson appears to view Davie’s ‘Movement-plus’ poetry as a
sort of unconscious vanguard for his critical work. The key to this
difference is, perhaps, chronological: as a student of Davie’s well
before the publication of *Purity of Diction*, Tomlinson could regret
his supervisor’s initial absorption into the publicity machine of the
Movement, whereas for Prynne the issue was always with his failure fully
to leave it behind.[^80] Yet both positions are complicated by a further
issue—namely, the uneasy involvement of Prynne and Tomlinson in the very
processes of literary promotion and publicity that formed the basis of
their antipathy towards the Movement. When ‘The Middlebrow Muse’ was
published, it was followed by rebuttals from both Davie and Enright.
Davie’s effort relies, as in much of his criticism, on the vague
insinuation of fascist sympathies: ‘That sneer at “democratic” shows how
far Mr. Tomlinson is from losing his nerve. He will run *any* risk,
throw down *any* safeguard.’[^81] It is Enright’s piece which deals the
crushing blow. Having dismissed the tone of Tomlinson’s review, with its
‘confidently aped Leavisian and Lawrentian gestures’, Enright undercuts
him in the most effective way possible:

> \singlespacing Mr. Tomlinson applies the new sneer-word
> ‘fellow-travellers’ to two of the contributors. Yet, in the case of
> both of the anthologies mentioned, the editors received one
> unsolicited manuscript (which they felt unable to use)—from
> Mr. Tomlinson. Of course Mr. Tomlinson retains the right (which he has
> used, in America and in England) to review these same anthologies.
> But, in choosing his abuse, has he forgotten that he himself, in full
> knowledge of who his ‘fellow-travellers’ would be, once applied for a
> ticket?[^82]

\noindent Tomlinson’s criticisms of the Movement are effectively, if
unfairly, painted as the *ressentiment* of a poetic also-ran. As Martin
Dodsworth points out, it was almost certainly Davie who showed
Tomlinson’s poems to both Conquest and Enright in the first place, a
circumstance which perhaps accounts for the review’s ambivalent take on
his work, viewing it as simultaneously hampered by the middlebrow
*milieu* and trying to push beyond it.[^83]

Prynne’s relations with the literary world through Davie were more
successful, and accordingly less dramatic. It is easy to identify at
least three opportunities afforded to Prynne in the early 1960s for
which Davie was, in all probability, at least partly responsible. The
most obvious is the publication of Prynne’s debut collection, *Force of
Circumstance*, by Routledge in 1962. Davie’s *A Winter Talent* had been
published by the firm in 1957 and his critical work *The Heyday of Sir
Walter Scott* in 1961. D.S. Marriott claims, without citation, that
‘Davie was \[…\] responsible for drawing Prynne’s manuscript of poems to
the attention of his then publishers’.[^84] Prynne’s letter to Dorn of
31 December that year makes clear that he considered Colin Franklin, his
contact at the firm, to be amenable to persuasion by poets already on
their list. Given that Davie was willing to write to Franklin in support
of Dorn, an American whom he had never met, it would certainly be odd if
he refused to do the same (or more) for his own student.[^85] The second
event which it seems reasonable to attribute to Davie is Prynne’s
delivery of a broadcast on the Third Programme in the same year.
Subsequently printed in the BBC magazine *The Listener* as ‘The Elegiac
World in Victorian Poetry’, the talk was originally broadcast at 8:45
p.m. on 15 December 1962 under the title ‘The World of Elegy’. The
*Radio Times* gives the following description: ‘During the last hundred
years elegiac poetry retired from the external world and created an
inner meditative world of its own symbols. Mr. Prynne discusses in
illustration some poems of Tennyson, Arnold, Eliot, and Wallace
Stevens.’[^86] Broadcasting on the Third Programme was in fact a
relatively common activity for Cambridge dons in this period, as is
amply demonstrated by contemporaneous schedules: Prynne’s talk came on
the same evening as a segment on ‘Science and the Industrial Future’ by
D.B. Welbourn (Selwyn) and the previous day saw a talk by D.M. MacKinnon
(Corpus Christi) on Martin Heidegger.[^87] Nevertheless, it seems likely
that Davie—perhaps through his acquaintance with George MacBeth, then a
Third Programme producer—would have had some hand in securing the
opportunity for Prynne, who was after all a relatively unknown figure at
this point. (Davie, by contrast, had appeared regularly on the Third
Programme since the early 1950s. In February and March of 1962, he
presented a four-part series on eighteenth-century poetry, while in the
early months of 1963 his work was broadcast as part of a twelve-episode
translation of the *Odyssey*.[^88]) The last of Davie’s potential
attempts to insinuate Prynne’s work into the London literary world is
represented by a January 1964 interview conducted as part of the ‘Poet
Speaks’ series by Peter Orr. Davie had himself been interviewed for this
series in October 1960 (and was recorded again in November 1964), and
the project was subsequently to be associated with Routledge through the
publication of selected interviews in a 1966 volume edited by Orr.[^89]

Prynne’s interview is interesting insofar as it contains some unusually
clear and concise statements of his poetic priorities in this period.
Asked whether he considers poetry something to be ‘dabbled with’, he
provides a response which seems to be aimed directly at those
unreconstructed elements of the Movement which had persisted into the
early 1960s:

> \singlespacing No, I think very much not to be dabbled with. I think
> this is probably one of the strongest feelings I have about it; one of
> the strongest feelings I have, indeed, about the contemporary
> situation here in England. The casualness, the sense that it can
> function at a low pressure, that one can write occasional poems, that
> one can be wry, self-deprecating, amusing, perhaps slightly
> embarrassed; the sense in which a poem can apparently be written at a
> fairly low level of engagement, of interest, of committal—all this
> seems very foreign to me, I think.[^90]

\noindent Prynne’s use of the word ‘foreign’ here is striking, not least
because these qualities are seen to represent precisely the English
character of contemporary poetry in similar statements from this period,
raising the possibility that it is Prynne himself who is in some sense
foreign. Reviewing Michael Hamburger and Christopher Middleton’s
anthology *Modern German Poetry, 1910–1960* (1962), Prynne repeatedly
sets up and opposes the categories ‘England’ and ‘Europe’, claiming, for
example, that ‘\[it\] is \[…\] a fundamental difference between the
imaginative climate of England and Europe, both in tone and in
structure, that this anthology is valuable for setting before us’, and
referring to ‘the gap between the intellectual climates responsible for
Larkin or Hughes on one side, and Ingeborg Bachmann or Paul Celan on the
other.’[^91] In a roughly contemporaneous letter to the little magazine
*Mica*, he describes ‘English writers of verse \[as\] sheltering with
provincial timidity behind the irony inherited from Eliot’, while in a
1961 letter to Olson he deplores the insularity of ‘Betjeman’s England
(the logical successor to Auden’s)’.[^92] This last statement offers a
solution to the problem, suggesting that while Prynne considers ‘wry,
self-deprecating, amusing’ tendencies to be typically English at that
point in time, this is a development that is both regrettable and
historically contingent. Englishness has been hijacked by Betjeman; it
is not a quality to which he can claim an absolute right.

The three events considered above show Davie introducing Prynne to the
mechanisms of mainstream poetic publicity and Prynne shifting between
acquiescence and resistance. As early as September 1962, he had
effectively disowned the collection that was to be published with
Davie’s help, writing to Olson that ‘my own Vol. of poems (out November)
is 96% of no interest to me. Zip-fastener type of thing—dead as no
door-nail would be, given any decent chance.’[^93] It is instructive to
compare this with Tomlinson’s early poetic career: after the publication
of a pamphlet of juvenilia, *Relations and Contraries* (1951), with
Erica Marx’s Hand and Flower Press, it was Davie’s support of
Tomlinson’s ‘first real collection’, *The Necklace* (1955), which helped
him ‘find \[his\] way into print’ in a more permanent sense, and that
set the tone for his subsequent work.[^94] Prynne and Tomlinson both
clearly felt ambivalent about using the cultural capital accumulated
through Davie’s association with the Movement in order to further their
own very different poetics. From the late 1960s onwards, Prynne’s
aversion manifested itself in an almost total rejection of the
mainstream literary world, the details of which will be discussed in the
first part of Chapter 2; Tomlinson, by contrast, had enjoyed the fruits
of Davie’s influence much earlier, and was thus able, once established,
to distance himself less completely from the older poet. Prynne’s early
involvement with Davie nevertheless complicates any attempt to present
his work as some sort of *sui generis* avant-garde artefact, or even to
characterise it primarily as an English offshoot of the Olsonian poetic
project.

Discussing a series of parodies of Movement poets written by Amis and
Larkin in 1956, Zachary Leader makes a helpful point about the fluidity
of literary allegiances in the 1950s, which might apply just as well to
the 1960s. While Stephen Spender was by this point one of the Movement’s
chief hate figures, Amis was perfectly happy to send him the parodies
for publication, with he and Larkin thereby ‘including their detractors
in a trick they hoped to play on their supporters.’[^95] Just as Amis
and Larkin were forced to rely on the existing literary infrastructure
represented by Spender’s CIA-backed *Encounter* in order to get their
voices heard and their names mentioned, Tomlinson and Prynne had little
choice but to accept Davie’s help if they were to promote their work in
any conventional sense: to ‘pour’ their work into a conventional
‘literary and economic mould’, as David Trotter writes of *Force of
Circumstance*.[^96] That Prynne decided, from the late 1960s, to forego
this promotion and to seek out alternative models of poetic
dissemination is part of what makes his subsequent career so exceptional
and worthy of study.[^97] As was demonstrated at the beginning of this
chapter, conventional encyclopaedic and scholarly conceptions of
Prynne’s work attempt—consciously or otherwise—to minimise the
importance of Davie, framing him as an influence who was quickly
superseded following the publication of *Force of Circumstance*. While
this is no doubt true in a poetic sense, Davie’s practical efforts to
aid Prynne in the early 1960s reverberate throughout the younger poet’s
entire career. Prynne’s decision to turn away from commercial
publication and the mainstream press was described above as a ‘total
rejection’, and it is true that his attempts to use Davie’s literary
connections to secure British publication for Olson and Dorn were
largely unsuccessful. Yet it was also Davie’s influence which helped to
secure Prynne’s fellowship at Caius, a position which has not only
afforded him the time and resources to produce poetic and critical work
but has also served as a base, over more than 50 years, for the
instruction and encouragement of younger poets. Prynne’s attitude to his
position at Cambridge will be considered in more detail at the end of
this chapter. First, it will be necessary to make another, more
contentious, case for influence.

iii. F.R. Leavis
----------------

Speaking at a colloquium on the history of Cambridge English in 2011,
Prynne recalled some of the famous figures with whom he had become
acquainted in what was then more than five decades of almost continuous
association with the Faculty: ‘I knew William Empson only slightly but I
enjoyed a free and easy relationship with Ivor Richards over many years,
and we had many conversations. I was even quite well acquainted with
F.R. Leavis and his wife Queenie.’[^98] Prynne and F.R. Leavis are very
rarely mentioned in the same breath—yet when the apparently obvious
political and aesthetic differences between the two men are set aside,
there is much to recommend the comparison. Both came up to Cambridge
from minor public schools after periods of military service; Prynne was
elected fellow of Caius relatively soon after his undergraduate degree
while Leavis worked on a Ph.D., but both served as teachers at the
university for many decades; both maintained ambivalent relationships
with Cambridge as an institution, by turns benefiting from the
privileges of relatively secure academic positions and acting as ‘ghosts
in the machine’, opposed to aspects of prevailing academic orthodoxy;
most importantly, both Leavis and Prynne have, to an extraordinary
degree, inspired successive generations of critical and poetic
‘followers’, for want of a better term.[^99] Responding to a piece by
Robert Archambeau in 2010, Andrea Brady vigorously contests his use of
the label ‘Cambridge School’, particularly in relation to her own work:
‘Personally, I feel like I’m forever being tagged “Cambridge School”,
even though I’ve lived in London for twice as long as I was a gownie,
and my time in the UK still adds up to far less than half my
life.’[^100] Just as with the controversial designator ‘the Movement’,
her rejection of the term is typical of the reactions of poets whom it
attempts to subsume. Yet by the mid 2010s a version of this usage had
reached the status of an established critical term, meriting inclusion
in a 2013 revised edition of the *Oxford Companion to Modern Poetry*:

> \singlespacing the term ‘Cambridge School’ refers to a particular
> grouping who began writing in the later 1960s, some of whom studied or
> worked in the city. J. H. Prynne is a central figure, together with
> Andrew Crozier, John James, Wendy Mulford, Douglas Oliver, and Peter
> Riley. \[…\] As with the New York School, it is now possible to speak
> of a ‘second generation’ of Cambridge poets \[…\]. A major anthology,
> *Conductors of Chaos* (Picador, 1996), ed. Iain Sinclair, includes
> work by Andrew Duncan, Michael Haslam, Tony Lopez, Grace Lake, Rod
> Mengham, Drew Milne, Ian Patterson, Denise Riley and John
> Wilkinson.[^101]

\noindent After moving into university teaching positions, many of these
poets have been involved, consciously or otherwise, in the creation of a
nascent academic infrastructure—critical books, conferences,
Ph.D. supervision—not totally dissimilar to that which grew up around
the so-called ‘Leavisites’, though smaller and largely situated at the
tertiary rather than the secondary level of the British education
system. To take one of the more obvious examples, as of the 2013/14
academic year the Cambridge English Faculty employed Ian Patterson, Rod
Mengham, Simon Jarvis and Drew Milne. All four were taught by Prynne—if
not through direct supervision, then through lectures—as undergraduates
at Cambridge in the 1960s, ’70s and ’80s. All four are poets whose work
has been published by the same small presses as Prynne’s (principally
Equipage and Barque, the former being run by Mengham himself). Most
importantly, since completing doctoral degrees at Cambridge, all four
have supervised further undergraduate, masters or doctoral work on
Prynne or related subjects.

While it is likely that Leavis only met Prynne at some point in the late
1960s, once his most important work, represented by the journal
*Scrutiny*, was safely behind him, Prynne is likely to have known of
Leavis at least a decade and perhaps even twenty years earlier, as a
schoolboy at St Dunstan’s College in Catford, South East London. As
Christopher Hilliard’s detailed analysis of admissions records shows, St
Dunstan’s was one of the most important ‘feeder schools’ for Leavis’s
infamous English course at Downing College, sending six boys in total,
three in the year 1948 alone.[^102] A memoir written by one of the three
records how an older brother advised the school’s English master, Basil
Harvey—dedicatee of *Force of Circumstance*—on which books would best
prepare pupils for Leavis’s notoriously exacting scholarship
exams.[^103] If Leavis was a distinct presence in Prynne’s schooling,
what of his undergraduate course? Prynne’s friendship with coursemate
Roger Langley and their request for supervision by Davie, who had
himself been taught by Leavis in the late 1940s, has been described
above. It is less clear who else supervised Prynne during this period.
As mentioned above, Prynne’s college tutor at the time was Laurence
Picken, and while this is usually a pastoral role Prynne has made clear
that Picken ‘taught me my first beginnings of Chinese and encouraged me
to help him with translations of some poetic texts.’[^104] In terms of
formal academic supervision, however, there are a number of more obvious
candidates. The Shakespeare scholar Philip Brockbank served as a college
lecturer at Jesus from 1954 to 1958, before moving to the universities
of Reading and York.[^105] Brockbank was closely associated with Leavis
during his tenure at the latter institution, though it is not clear how
well the two men knew each other in the late 1950s. The Scottish
literary historian David Daiches was, meanwhile, appointed fellow of
Jesus in 1957, presumably to fill the teaching gap left by the death of
A.P. Rossiter in the same year. Listed as Director of Studies in English
in the college’s 1959 annual report, Daiches again raises the spectre of
Leavis, albeit negatively.[^106] Janet Burroway, a contemporary of
Prynne’s and a Marshall Scholar at Newnham College during this period,
recalls ‘a rivalry between the camps of Daiches and Leavis’, though
Daiches maintained that he only ‘learned later’ of the war that was
‘going on at Cambridge between F.R. Leavis and his enemies’.[^107]
Finally, in a recent interview, Prynne describes being taught by Raymond
Williams, who was more than happy to acknowledge his ‘Debt to
Dr. Leavis’ in this period.[^108]

On the basis of this brief biographical sketch, it seems fair to say
that Prynne spent his sixth-form and college years in an environment
suffused by Leavis’s judgements and approach, if only as foils for more
catholic approaches to the canon, as in the first volume of Daiches’s
*Critical History of English Literature* (1960). The results of this
distinctive form of critical training can be felt in the early prose
piece ‘The Elegiac World in Victorian Poetry’. Here, Prynne advances a
theory about Victorian ‘meditative’ poetry which bears a strong
resemblance to the argument put forward in Leavis’s *New Bearings in
English Poetry* (1932). Prynne posits a shift in English poetry
following Romanticism, from traditional ‘odes and poems of elegiac
reflection’, which pay at least some attention to the outside world, to
a more specific, ‘narcotic’ form of self-sufficient meditation. In
Wordsworth’s ‘Tintern Abbey’, a poem which precedes the shift proper,
‘the conventionalized landscape is already yielding final pre-eminence
to the speculation it prompts’, but its details still ‘stand as
legitimate experiential antecedents, as the roots, however apparently
slight, from which the subsequent reflection springs.[^109] By contrast,
in Tennyson’s ‘Ulysses’—‘one of the earliest meditative poems in which
the change I have been discussing has already taken
place’—‘\[i\]ncantation has taken the place of description as the main
meditative technique. The world is as wide as the range of one’s desires
and virtuosity of expression makes it to be, since the poem is not a
means of focussing one’s attention but of diffusing it.’[^110] Prynne
gives the principal characteristic of meditative poetry as
‘scene-painting’, turning to a contemporary review of Tennyson by John
Stuart Mill for a definition:

> \singlespacing Of all the capacities of a poet, that which seems to
> have arisen earliest in Mr Tennyson, and in which he most excels, is
> that of scene-painting, in the highest sense of the term: not the mere
> power of producing that rather vapid species of composition usually
> termed descriptive poetry—for there is not in these volumes one
> passage of pure description but the power of *creating* scenery, in
> keeping with some state of human feeling; so fitted to it as to be the
> embodied symbol of it, and to summon up the state of feeling itself,
> with a force not to be surpassed by anything but reality.[^111]

\noindent The part of *New Bearings* from which Prynne’s argument can be
seen most clearly to derive—or at least to draw inspiration—is the first
chapter. Like Prynne, Leavis locates the fulcrum of his argument at the
point of transition from the Romantic to the Victorian, arguing that
English poets of the later nineteenth century failed to develop
aesthetic techniques adequate to changes in the broader intellectual
climate and its language, clinging to outmoded ‘ideas of the essentially
poetical which, when the conditions which gave rise to them \[…\]
changed, bar\[red\] the poet from his most valuable material’.[^112] At
first glance, this emphasis on stasis might seem at odds with Prynne’s
theory of an important change between, say, Wordsworth and Tennyson, but
these attitudes are really two sides of the same coin. The change that
Prynne identifies is a reconfiguration of the relationship between
poetic language and reality, not necessarily a change in poetic language
itself: like passengers in a stationary train carriage, Victorian poets
think they are moving forwards when in fact they are simply watching an
adjacent train pull out of the station. Differentiating the meditative
poetry with which he is concerned from an earlier tradition, Prynne
notes that ‘performances such as “Lycidas” were essentially public
events, monuments crafted out of a shared language, in such a way that
the feeling expressed was cogently personal but also anonymous’—the
problem for later poets is that the poetic language which they continue
to use is no longer ‘shared’ in any real sense.[^113] Importantly,
Prynne and Leavis not only provide common diagnoses of the disjunction
between poetic language and the world in which it is written, but also
provide remarkably similar assessments of the texture of this
language—what it feels like to read. ‘Nineteenth-century poetry,’ writes
Leavis, ‘\[…\] was characteristically preoccupied with the creation of a
dream-world.’[^114] Where Prynne describes meditative poetry as
‘narcotic’, Leavis notes that, in a piece of ‘late Victorian poetastry’
by Andrew Lang, ‘it is the music of the languid hours that
predominates’.[^115] Leavis even identifies Tennyson as a paradigmatic
example of the tendency:

> \singlespacing He might wrestle solemnly with the ‘problems of the
> age,’ but the habits, conventions and techniques that he found
> congenial are not those of a poet who could have exposed himself to
> the rigours of the contemporary climate. And in this he is
> representative. It was possible for the poets of the Romantic period
> to believe that the interests animating their poetry were the forces
> moving the world, or that might move it. But Victorian poetry admits
> implicitly that the actual world is alien, recalcitrant and
> unpoetical, and that no protest is worth making except the protest of
> withdrawal.[^116]

\noindent Where ‘The Elegiac World’ diverges significantly from Leavis
is in its assessment of aesthetic developments subsequent to the
nineteenth century. As the title suggests, the purpose of *New Bearings*
is to set out what makes the work of its three primary subjects—T.S.
Eliot, Ezra Pound and Gerard Manley Hopkins—different from the poems
that Leavis castigates in the initial chapter. By contrast, Prynne’s
model of the relationship between late-Victorian and twentieth-century
English poetry is fundamentally one of continuity. Introducing his
argument via Wallace Stevens’s late poem ‘The World as Meditation’,
Prynne brings together ‘Tennyson’s “In Memoriam”, Arnold’s “Dover Beach”
\[and\] Eliot’s “Prufrock”’ as three more poems which give ‘a rough idea
of what I mean’ by the word meditative.[^117] Eliot is considered in
more detail at the very end of the piece, where he is ambivalently
credited with having ‘maintained the subjective cocoon while draining it
of its overt melancholy. We remain inside the mind, but it is not clear
whose mind is in question, and the emotional modality is largely
neutralized.’[^118] There is a parallel here with Leavis’s assessment of
Eliot’s *Gerontion* in the third chapter of *New Bearings*, where he
praises the poem’s ‘really dramatic detachment’: ‘From a position far
above his immediate concerns as a particular individual, projecting
himself, as it were, into a comprehensive and representative human
consciousness, the poet contemplates human life and asks what it all
comes to.’[^119] Yet where Leavis sees a decisive break, Prynne sees a
development in a tradition, as his final paragraph makes clear:

> \singlespacing The Victorian meditative poem was too crass in its
> sentimentalism, by and large, to remain adequate as an acknowledged
> model for twentieth-century technique; but in the structure of its
> world and its means of creating around it its own
> ambience—‘scene-painting’, in Mill’s phrase—it remains unexpectedly
> with us. Like Penelope in Stevens’s poem, the modern poet would hardly
> recognize a contingent event if he saw one, and least of all if he had
> been expecting it.[^120]

\noindent That Prynne considers himself at least partially exempt from
this last comment is suggested by the language used to set out the
argument in the earlier stages of the piece: writing approvingly of
‘Tintern Abbey’, he notes that ‘in Wordsworth’s encounter with his theme
there remains a positive force of circumstance’, the latter three words
being the title of Prynne’s own first collection of poems.[^121]

It is worth dwelling on what Prynne might actually mean by this phrase,
and by his apparent enthusiasm for the ‘contingent event’ in the passage
quoted above. On one level, ‘force of circumstance’ is a conventional
phrase, usually preceded by ‘through’ or ‘by’ and used to indicate
unavoidable, external pressures impinging on the subject of a sentence.
The *Times Digital Archive* shows its first usage in the newspaper in
1833, with much more regular appearances from the end of the Edwardian
period. As a title, ‘The Force of Circumstance’ had already been used by
W. Somerset Maugham in 1928, while Steve Clark notes that Prynne’s usage
‘perhaps alludes to Hardy’s *Satires of Circumstance*’.[^122] In the
context of this particular collection of poems, however, there seems to
be a more pressing ideological-aesthetic meaning. James Keery has
claimed provocatively that ‘on the strength of this early collection
alone Prynne deserves to be recognised as the finest Movement poet bar
Larkin and Davie.’ Whether or not this act of recuperation can be
accepted in its entirety, Keery’s earlier contention that ‘*Force of
Circumstance* is recognisably derivative from Davie’ is not
substantially in doubt.[^123] Given this, it is not too much of a
stretch to read the valorisation of ‘force of circumstance’ as an
anti-Romantic, Movement-style exhortation to modesty: an injunction not
to interfere unduly with the forces that shape circumstance, but simply
to observe and to record them.[^124] This certainly seems to be force of
the phrase in the collection’s titular poem, in which the speaker
reflexively contemplates his or her own memory of a ‘broken, idle
mill-wheel’, repeatedly refusing to modify the image by making the wheel
turn, or even by imagining the reconstruction of ‘the rotting chute |
That brought the water to it’ in order to allow it to turn of its own
accord. For the speaker, ‘the force | Of circumstance \[…\] protects the
place’, preventing any such interference, though at the poem’s
conclusion he or she is permitted to ‘set a heron down, a tense | And
watchful silence’ which figures the speaker’s own position as
observer.[^125]

The phrase ‘contingent event’, as used by Prynne, has the potential to
confuse this interpretation. The clearest source for this concept is
Chapter 9 of Aristotle’s *De Interpretatione*, which raises the famous
question of the truth value of the proposition ‘A sea battle will take
place.’ If any proposition must be either true or false, then whether or
not the battle will take place must already have been determined, a
situation which apparently leaves no room for contingency. Citing the
common-sense perception of human will as causative, Aristotle attempts
to reconcile these conflicting positions by seeming to restrict the
principle of bivalence: ‘Everything must either be or not be, whether in
the present or in the future, but it is not always possible to
distinguish and state determinately which of these alternatives must
necessarily come about.’[^126] This ambiguous solution to what has been
termed the problem of future contingents provided the fuel for a
long-running debate over the relationship between human free will and
God’s omnipotence, particularly in the Scholastic period. Much of this
discussion was spurred by an influential commentary on Aristotle’s text
by the late Roman philosopher Boethius, an author to whom Prynne has
acknowledged a profound debt.[^127] What, then, does Prynne mean when he
claims that ‘the modern poet would hardly recognize a contingent event
if he saw one, and least of all if he had been expecting it’? The
traditional opposition between contingency and necessity would seem to
undercut his point—surely it is the *necessary* event which shows the
true force of circumstance, determined as it is by external forces
rather than by human will? It is possible, however, to suggest that in
the context of ‘The Elegiac World’ a necessary event would be one which
fit too neatly into the poem’s meditative structure, as conceived by the
poet himself. A contingent event is in this sense the type of event most
truly determined by circumstance. The final part of Prynne’s
comment—‘and least of all if he had been expecting it’—would seem on
this reading to be a joke at the expense of poets who are eager to bear
witness to contingent reality, but only within their own pre-conceived
formal structures.

Beyond literary criticism, a number of Prynne’s early letters to Olson
and Dorn also bear Leavis’s mark in their scathing assessments of the
English literary and artistic scene. In his very first letter to Olson,
for instance, Prynne takes aim at one of Leavis’s favourite targets, the
so-called Bloomsbury Set, supposedly ‘still in the saddle’ in 1961; his
next letter includes a brief shot at Auden, another Leavisian
bugbear.[^128] Bloomsbury is again attacked in a 1962 letter to Dorn,
though tempered by a precisely anti-Leavisite impatience with a
situation in which ‘D.H. Lawrence is a culture-hero and Ezra Pound a
sort of curious and sinister joke.’[^129] Leavis’s opposition to
Bloomsbury is part of a broader assault on what he describes, in a
discussion of John Maynard Keynes and Stephen Spender, as ‘the habit of
substituting the social-personal values for the relevant ones’; Prynne,
for his part, rails against ‘*seeing a lot of each other as method*’ in
a May 1967 letter to Peter Riley, referring to the work of younger poets
associated with *The English Intelligencer*.[^130] Both attitudes seem
to derive, at least in part, from a suspicion of a particular form of
homosocial interaction. Q.D. Leavis, at one with her husband on matters
Bloomsbury, extends to outright homophobia in her discussion of the
public school *milieu*, attributing the success of the ‘evidently
unqualified reviewers \[who\] fill the literary weeklies’ to ‘hav\[ing\]
been “the most fashionable boy in the school”, or to hav\[ing\] had a
feline charm or a sensual mouth and long eyelashes.’[^131] Prynne, in a
slightly earlier letter to Riley, raises an odd objection to close
male-male contact that fails to extend to ‘the full homosexual passion &
stop at nothing’, while a later mention of John Ashbery and his ‘various
camp followers’ encouraging ‘feeble insecurity’ in young English poets
is more overtly homophobic.[^132]

Whether following Leavis’s judgements or challenging them, the most
significant thing is that Prynne is engaging with them, and doing so in
a broadly Leavisite style: briskly and with a minimum of argument. This
formal similarity between Prynne and Leavis can be seen even in relation
to the latter’s most elitist critical positions, including his
well-known advocacy of ‘minority culture’. Writing in the opening
paragraphs of his pamphlet *Mass Civilisation and Minority Culture*
(1930), Leavis uses an epigraph from Matthew Arnold and a quotation from
I.A. Richards to launch into a typically vague statement of his basic
position: ‘The minority capable not only of appreciating Dante,
Shakespeare, Donne, Baudelaire, Hardy (to take major instances) but of
recognising their latest successors constitute the consciousness of the
race (or a branch of it) at a given time.’ He lays stress on the close
relationship between this minority and language: ‘In their keeping \[…\]
is the language, the changing idiom, upon which fine living depends, and
without which distinction of spirit is thwarted and incoherent. By
“culture” I mean the use of such a language.’[^133] On a purely
terminological level, it is revealing that Prynne uses the term
‘discriminating minority’ to describe the audience for Daiches’s and
Davie’s talks to the Jesus College Literary Society in the report
referred to above, though this may of course be an ironic usage. Writing
to Ed Dorn in 1963, in the wake of a disappointing encounter with a
major publishing house, he follows Leavis more explicitly, railing
against the commercial debasement of literary standards:

> \singlespacing They \[i.e. the publishers\] pretend to listen when
> spoken to (as in the enclosed missive), but are in fact all the time
> reckoning up what’s in it for them and how the Great British Public
> will take it. And the answer of course in most cases is, that they
> won’t take it at all; they’ve been cossetted \[*sic*\] in the
> second-rate for too long, & most of them have given up reading
> anything but brisk brash novels about the modern social scene.[^134]

\noindent This dismissal draws much of its force from the shared
Prynnian–Leavisian opposition to ‘the habit of substituting the
social-personal values for the relevant ones’: modern novels are not
only produced *by* a coterie system of prominent authors, publishers and
newspaper reviewers, but also *about* this system, or its analogues
elsewhere in public life. The ‘modern social scene’ has become a
self-sustaining tumour on the body of the ‘Great British Public’, and
the only solution short of cutting it off is to ignore the infected
organism entirely. In a letter to the publishing house André Deutsch the
following year, occasioned by the rejection of Dorn’s novel *The Rites
of Passage*, Prynne reiterates this opinion while providing a bold
description of his job as a university teacher:

> \singlespacing We agree, it appears, only on the difficulty of selling
> \[the book\] to the great British public, who always have and always
> will prefer the lending library fodder provided for them in such
> conspicuous abundance. And in any case I suppose that I don’t read a
> great deal of contemporary fiction, since too much of it is insipid,
> garrulous, and genteel to vanishing point. However, it’s my
> professional business to know the serious ethical shapeliness of real
> writing when I see it, to find it there and reclaim it for those who
> will stop to read.[^135]

Prynne’s description of what characterises ‘real writing’ as a ‘serious
ethical shapeliness’ is worth considering in detail. What might at first
glance seem like a string of weighty adjectives designed to puff up the
status of his ‘professional business’ in fact ties in with previous
statements made by Prynne about poetic form. In particular, the word
‘shapeliness’ echoes a 1962 *paean* to ‘the poem’s achieved shape’:
‘This is not only the words as isolated monads, but their ordering; the
grammar of feeling: the movement forward speeded or checked by the
adverbs, bent, inverted or split by the conjunctions, maintained always
by the constant verb.’[^136] This, in turn, recalls both the argument
put forward in the 1961 piece ‘Resistance and Difficulty’, which
celebrates the ability of poems to become real objects in the world,
perceptible through their very resistance to perception, and the
editorial statement appended to Prynne’s issue of *Prospect*, which
declares that ‘\[w\]ork sent in should preferably be extensive enough to
define its own contour’.[^137] The most important five words of the
quotation above can, however, be found in the first sentence: ‘always
have and always will’. While a disgruntled letter to a publisher should
not be taken too seriously as a statement of fundamental artistic
principles, Prynne’s position here is remarkable both for its elitism
and for its pessimism: he seems at least to acknowledge a structural
component (‘conspicuous abundance’) in the determination of the reading
habits of the ‘great British public’, but also seems to rule out any
possibility of change—those who ‘will stop to read’ will stop anyway,
regardless of Prynne’s professional efforts; those who won’t, won’t.
There is, of course, more than one model for aesthetic elitism in the
long history of modernism—Leavis himself was strongly influenced by
Eliot’s critical work—but, given the prominence of Leavis both in
Prynne’s ‘schooling so-called’ and in the Cambridge environment of the
late 1950s and early ’60s, it would be misleading not to note
similarities where they arise.[^138]

Does this formative exposure to Leavis leave any trace in Prynne’s
mature work, specifically that which was produced subsequent to his
now-disowned debut collection? To attempt to answer this question, a
specific set of ideas which appear in Prynne’s poetry and prose in the
mid-to-late 1960s will be examined, with the suggestion of either a
direct derivation from the pages of *Scrutiny* or a provenance in later
intellectual currents nevertheless influenced by Leavis and his
supporters. Evidence will then be introduced for a development in
Prynne’s poetic thinking in the 1970s away from what might be termed the
‘vulgar Leavisism’ of the the essay on Victorian poetry discussed above,
before this chapter turns to consider Prynne’s and Leavis’s respective
attitudes towards their professional positions at Cambridge.

iv. May Day and Metaphor
------------------------

One of the concerns that has been most clearly identified in Prynne’s
earliest mature collection, *Kitchen Poems*—and specifically in the long
poem ‘Die a Millionaire’—is that of ‘wants’ and ‘needs’, and the
relationship between the two. According to the remarkably
straightforward assertions of this poem, imperialism can be described as
the idea that ‘what you want, you by | historic process or just
readiness | to travel, also “need”’; furthermore, ‘the market defines
wants from | single reckoning into a social need’, and the engine of
modern consumer capitalism itself is the ‘mass-conversion of *want*
(sectional) into | *need* (social & then total)’.\[\^lawrence\]
Referring to a number of other poems, as well as to the short prose
piece ‘About Warning an Invited Audience’, Sutherland notes that
Prynne’s attitude here ‘bears a strong affinity to Guy Debord’s
Situationist polemic against “alienated consumption” in *The Society of
the Spectacle*, published, like Prynne’s “Warning”, in 1967.’[^139] The
comparison is apt, and there is indeed evidence that Prynne was reading
Situationist material in this period. Writing to Peter Riley in
September 1967, he describes how Barry MacSweeney is ‘translating Le
Point d’Explosion de l’Idéologie en Chine, a current pamphlet from
l’Internationale Situationniste’—this pamphlet, like many of the
anonymous texts printed in *IS*, was authored by Debord.[^140]
Nevertheless, it would be extremely optimistic to think that the
intellectual background to a collection as complex as *Kitchen Poems*
could be mapped cleanly on to a single source, particularly as there is
at least one other strong contender for influence.

Exactly three months before the letter referred to above, Prynne sent
Riley a postcard and a copy of the *May Day Manifesto*, which had been
published the previous month.[^141] Edited by Stuart Hall, E.P. Thompson
and Raymond Williams, the manifesto ‘appeared with the names of over 70
signatories—writers, academics and activists associated with the New
Left.’[^142] Prynne clearly considered it important enough for Riley to
have his own copy, instructing him not to return it ‘as I’ll get another
here’. The *May Day Manifesto* is concerned with the political economy
of then-contemporary Britain, focussing particularly on the country’s
position as a client state in a global economy dominated by the United
States, its relationship with its former colonies through the dubious
frameworks of ‘international development’, and the various facts on the
ground, especially the structural dominance of the Labour Party, which
had served as blocks to the emergence of any radical left-wing challenge
to the *status quo*. Throughout this broadly Western Marxist analysis,
the manifesto maintains a crucial focus on the fundamentally constructed
nature of what economists term ‘demand’, a focus which is at its
sharpest in Chapter 13, on ‘The laws of the new market’: ‘The process of
diffusion of new wants is conditioned and reinforced by advertising in
which ideas of prestige and status are directly exploited. When
breakfast cereals packets ask, in colour, whether we “want to be the
first family in our road to have colour T.V.”, a new “want” is being
created in thousands of homes.’[^143] The scope of concern here is
perhaps more locally economic than Prynne’s—nevertheless, the
similarities in terminology, particularly the use of the substantive
form of the verb ‘want’, are striking. There is less direct comparison
between ‘wants’ and ‘needs’ in the *May Day Manifesto* than there is in
Prynne’s work, but here, again, there are linguistic similarities: the
phrase ‘social need’, for example, which appears in Chapter 7 of the
manifesto, or the general assertion in Chapter 13 that ‘the mass
consumption path set by market-led growth *generates needs* for
increasingly higher standards of public provision’ (emphasis
mine).[^144]

As mentioned above, the *May Day Manifesto* was a product of the New
Left: specifically, the group surrounding the journal *New Left Review*,
which was formed by the merger of the *New Reasoner* and the
*Universities and Left Review* in 1960. This group, in turn, owed an
extraordinary—if contradictory—intellectual debt to Leavis and
*Scrutiny*, a debt fully acknowledged in Francis Mulhern’s *The Moment
of ‘Scrutiny’* (1979) and Raymond Williams’s contribution to the 1959
*Critical Quarterly* symposium on ‘Our Debt to Dr. Leavis’, mentioned
above. In terms of concrete ideas, one of the key inheritances was
precisely the focus on the manipulation of wants and needs described
above. While this was an idea of great importance to Marx, particularly
in his early work, its significance in the broad tradition of Marxist
scholarship has been limited by accidents of publication. As Andrew
Chitty points out, ‘\[i\]t was in the *Notes on James Mill* (1844), the
*Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts* (1844) and *The German
Ideology* (with Engels, 1845–6), that Marx worked out his philosophical
anthropology’—yet these texts all remained unpublished well into the
twentieth century.[^145] Crucially, the *Economic and Philosophical
Manuscripts* and the *Notes on James Mill*, in which the concept of need
is dealt with most directly, were first translated into English as late
as 1959 and 1975 respectively, creating a gap in English-language
Marxist scholarship not significantly bridged until the translation of
Ágnes Heller’s *The Theory of Need in Marx* in 1976.[^146]

Herbert Marcuse’s *One-Dimensional Man* (1964), with its discussion of
‘false needs’, would certainly have had an influence on the *May Day
Manifesto* group, as would much of the other culturally-focussed work of
the Frankfurt School. Three decades earlier, however, *Scrutiny* was
also clearly concerned with, for example, the role of advertising in the
proliferation of new human needs. Key examples of this attitude are F.R.
Leavis and Denys Thompson’s *Culture and Environment* (1933), which
positions literary-critical training specifically as a tool to resist
the call of the ad-men, and Q.D. Leavis’s *Fiction and the Reading
Public* (1932), which focuses on the marketing of modern fiction. Rather
than focus on economics proper, a number of *Scrutiny*’s contributors
took a sociological turn, drawing on American works like Robert and
Helen Lynd’s *Middletown* (1929) in attempts to chart the future of an
increasingly consumerist British society.[^147] Discussing Frank
Whitehead’s contribution to the 1964 Penguin paperback *Discrimination
and Popular Culture*, edited by Thompson, Hilliard describes it as ‘a
conspectus of *Scrutiny* arguments about advertising from thirty years
before’, going on to provide a summary which, if rendered into the
present tense, would not seem out of place in Chapter 10, on
‘Advertising’, of the *May Day Manifesto*:

> \singlespacing The standardization of goods effected by mass
> production meant that advertising was needed to create illusory
> differences, a distinctive ‘emotional aura’ for each brand (of
> cigarettes, for instance). \[…\] Advertising encouraged people to
> define the good life in materialistic terms. Advertising pandered to
> bad desires and manufactured new ones.[^148]

\noindent That Prynne’s work is concerned with the manufacture of such
‘bad desires’ is clear. If this attitude can be plausibly linked to a
French intellectual *milieu* still relatively obscure in the Britain of
the mid 1960s (the first English translation of Debord’s *Society of the
Spectacle* was not produced until 1970), then it can surely also be
traced to an indigenous equivalent which, though politically and
aesthetically far-removed, nevertheless shared some of its concerns.

A divergence between Prynne and Leavis can, nevertheless, be felt in
their one clearly documented encounter, which occurred in the letters
pages of the *Times Literary Supplement* in 1971. On 6 May that year,
the *TLS* printed the text of a lecture titled ‘The Osmotic Sap’,
delivered by the Movement poet Roy Fuller in his role as Professor of
Poetry at the University of Oxford. The theme of the lecture was the
interaction between poetry and science, one which might be expected to
pique the interest both of the recent author of *Brass* (1971) and of
Leavis, who had famously engaged with C.P. Snow over a similar issue
less than a decade earlier.[^149] Fuller begins the lecture with two
extended quotations. The first is taken from Leavis’s celebrated
‘revaluation’ of Shelley, first printed in *Scrutiny* in 1935 and
subsequently collected in *Revaluation: Tradition and Development in
English Poetry* (1936). Here, Leavis uses the second section of
Shelley’s ‘Ode to the West Wind’ (‘Thou on whose stream, ’mid the steep
sky’s commotion, | Loose clouds like earth’s decaying leaves are shed, |
Shook from the tangled boughs of heaven and ocean’, etc.) to launch a
full-scale attack on the poet’s approach to metaphor:

> \singlespacing In what respects are the ‘loose clouds’ like ‘decaying
> leaves’? The correspondence is certainly not in shape, colour or way
> of moving. It is only the vague general sense of windy tumult that
> associates the clouds and the leaves; and, accordingly, the
> appropriateness of the metaphor ‘stream’ in the first line is not that
> it suggests a surface on which, like leaves, the clouds might be
> ‘shed,’ but that it contributes to the general ‘streaming’ effect in
> which the inappropriateness of ‘shed’ passes unnoticed. What, again,
> are those ‘tangled boughs of Heaven and Ocean’? They stand for nothing
> that Shelley could have pointed to in the scene before him; the
> ‘boughs,’ it is plain, have grown out of the ‘leaves’ in the previous
> line, and we are not to ask what the tree is.[^150]

\noindent Making use of a biological metaphor himself, Leavis summarises
what he opposes in Shelley as ‘a general tendency of the images to
forget the status of the metaphor or simile that introduced them and to
assume an autonomy and a right to propagate, so that we lose in confused
generations and perspectives the perception or thought that was the
ostensible *raison d’être* of imagery’.[^151] Having quoted Leavis at
length, Fuller proceeds to quote an extended passage from the physicist
and poet Desmond King-Hele’s *Shelley: His Thought and Work* (1960) in
which every detail of the ‘Ode to the West Wind’ is meticulously
accounted for in modern meteorological terms. The central thrust of the
argument is that Shelley’s ‘loose clouds’ are of the fractostratus type,
and that ‘\[t\]he *tangled boughs* from which these leaf-like clouds are
shaken are those regions of air whose slightly adverse pressures,
temperature and humidities make them the destined birthplace for
clouds.’ Furthermore, ‘\[t\]hese parcels of air, turbulent,
ever-changing in shape like wind-blown boughs, contain a mixture of
water-vapour from *Ocean* and air from *Heaven*.’[^152]

Leavis was predictably unimpressed by the narrow scientism of this
supposed refutation and wrote to the editor of the *TLS* on 21 May to
defend his 35-year-old argument:

> \singlespacing One needn’t question the scientific accuracy of the
> detailed point with which \[King-Hele\] defends the stanza, in order
> to reflect that imagery which has to be explained in this way does not
> owe the persuasiveness it has had, and can still have, for lovers of
> Shelley to the kind of felicity the meteorological specialist
> elucidates here. The reader who finds ‘shook from the tangled boughs
> of Heaven and Ocean’ potent and right (as he may go on doing after
> accepting Mr. King-Hele’s defence) is not enjoying delicately precise
> and felicitous observation, but paying implicit tribute to the
> Shelleyan hypnoidal power, which precludes the kind of actively
> intelligent attention Mr. King-Hele’s defence required of him—and
> required of Mr. Fuller.[^153]

\noindent Both the argument and the language here bear an even stronger
resemblance to Prynne’s ‘The Elegiac World’ than does Chapter 1 of *New
Bearings in English Poetry*. The reference to a lack of ‘actively
intelligent attention’, for instance, echoes Prynne’s comments on
meditative poetry as ‘a means not of focussing one’s attention but of
diffusing it’, while a later description of Shelley’s ‘Adonaïs’ as ‘a
triumph of intoxicated and intoxicating narcissism’ could have been
lifted directly from Prynne’s essay (though given Shelley’s dates and
Prynne’s description of the 1833 ‘Ulysses’ as one of the earliest poems
‘in which the change I have been discussing has already taken place’,
the actual assessment would likely be out of place). By 1971, however,
Prynne’s view both of Shelley and of the qualities originally identified
by Leavis—the ‘tendency of the images to forget the status of the
metaphor’—is absolutely not in accordance with that of the older critic.
Entering the fray on 28 May with another letter to the editor, Prynne
does not attempt to counter the descriptive aspect of Leavis’s
assessment of Shelley. In fact, he agrees with it, describing it as ‘a
brilliantly shrewd piece of attentiveness to the uncongenial.’[^154]
What he puts in question is ‘whether the second stage of the diagnosis
\[i.e. that Shelley is a bad poet\] necessarily follows from the first
\[i.e. that Shelley pursues metaphor beyond strictly mimetic bounds\]:
and if not necessarily, then whether in a range of important particular
cases it seems actually to describe our critical response.’[^155] The
tone of the letter (‘And I should have thought it possible by now …’) is
weary, as if it is frustrating to have to make such a basic logical
point ‘thirty-five years later’, though in actual fact Leavis’s original
revaluation was published before Prynne was born. As Ross Wilson puts
it, Prynne ‘responds to Leavis with a stern acuity of which Leavis
himself would have been proud’, even taking a swipe at Leavis’s critical
method: ‘we can by now surely see why, assuming on prior moral-epistemic
grounds a necessary entailment, Dr. Leavis could hardly make a
dispassionate critical appraisal of the actualities.’[^156]

What is most interesting about Prynne’s letter, however, is not its
demolition of the Leavisian position but the aesthetic potential that he
goes on to attribute to Shelley’s technique. If Leavis is affronted by
the tendency of upwardly mobile images to assume ‘autonomy and a right
to propagate’, Prynne positively encourages it:

> \singlespacing the variable transfer of the criteria for imaginative
> coherence from the grounds of figurative language to the forms of
> language resulting from overlapping figurational transformation is a
> major source of excitement and energy in Shelley’s writing. \[… A\]t
> its best, this produces a power and vigour of creative intelligence in
> the working out of ideas astonishingly disregarded at the present
> time.[^157]

\noindent Prynne has, by this point, gone far beyond the rigid
schematism of the analysis in his early essay on Victorian poetry, and
therefore beyond Leavis as well. As the final words here indicate,
Prynne is not only criticising Leavis’s well-worn argument, but also
passing judgement on what was then contemporary scholarship on Shelley:
books like Seymour Reiter’s *A Study of Shelley’s Poetry* (1967),
described by Jerome McGann as ‘a leisurely and often disingenuous tour
of the Shelley corpus, connecting the works along a thin thread of
biography.’[^158] This focus on biography at the expense of ‘ideas’
seems to have been a common feature of work on Shelley in the late
1960s, leading P.H. Butter to review Reiter’s book and Donald H.
Reiman’s *Percy Bysshe Shelley* (1969) in almost exactly mirrored terms:
‘Readers familiar with Shelley and Shelley criticism will plod rather
wearily through most of this book, in which a sensible but unoriginal
account of the poet’s life is interwoven with explications of all his
major and many of his minor poems’; ‘In this book \[Reiman\] interweaves
a sound and accurate account of the events of Shelley’s life with
interpretations of his chief poems and prose essays.’[^159] What, then,
is Prynne proposing instead? A clue is provided by his actual critical
practice—for example, in his commentaries on Shakespeare, Wordsworth and
George Herbert, published from 2001 onwards.[^160] All three of these
texts are structured as meticulous, line-by-line—often
word-by-word—readings of individual poems. Prynne maintains a fine
balance in each case between explication of meaning, identification of
potential source material and reference to biographical or contextual
data. The focus is fundamentally on the poem as a ‘machine made out of
words’, but not in the strictly acontextual manner of I.A. Richards and
without Leavis’s overarching emphasis on quality and literary
‘standards’ (though this may simply be because all three commentaries
consider poems of which Prynne approves).[^161] This helps to explain
the interest shown in the *TLS* letter in Shelley’s innovative use of
metaphor: Prynne is concerned with what Shelley’s language actually
does, not with what it *should* do.

In order to show that this attitude has persisted more or less intact
throughout Prynne’s mature career, it will be necessary to bring things
full circle and to return to the late poetry of Wallace Stevens with
which ‘The Elegiac World’ began. In a recent prose pamphlet, *Concepts
and Conception in Poetry* (2014), Prynne offers a close reading of
Stevens’ ‘Prologues to What is Possible’, first published in 1952 in the
same issue of *The Hudson Review* as ‘The World as Meditation’.[^162] In
the course of his reading, Prynne repeatedly emphasises the autonomy
that the poem achieves through eschewing recognisable exterior
reference: ‘the development of this poem has been set up to seem to give
the poem itself its own autonomy, its opportunity to nominate and follow
its own logic, or logics, in which the mariner once notionally in charge
merges into the compound vehicle of these flights of resemblance and
imagery’.[^163] Having referred directly to ‘the English Romantic poets,
exemplary to Stevens’, Prynne seems to raise exactly the metaphorical
process which he earlier attributed to Shelley, ‘the outreach of
metaphor from the *tenor* (source domain) of a reference-base to the
*vehicle* (target domain) of transformed semblance’:

> \singlespacing As the voyage \[the ostensible subject of the poem\] is
> transported by the fiction of its conception, being poetically
> conceived, from the near and familiar to a far distant and unknown
> ‘destination’ (*3*), the mariner’s own destiny becomes near
> unrecognisable to himself (*21*), he can scarcely traverse these newly
> indefinite and far-reaching intervals between the tenor of his own
> being-in-the-world and the vehicles of devised comparison not fully
> nor any longer within his control.[^164]

\noindent ‘Prologues to What Is Possible’ is certainly a more
self-conscious poem than the ‘Ode to the West Wind’—Prynne describes it
as being able to ‘pick up and even toy with its own strands’—but by
virtue of his employment of the same technique of self-developing and
self-sustaining metaphor, Stevens is fundamentally a similar poet to
Shelley.[^165] By the same token, it seems fair to say that the Prynne
who writes so approvingly of Stevens in 2014 is more or less the same as
the Prynne who rushed to Shelley’s defence in 1971.

A final point of simultaneous comparison and difference can be found in
Prynne’s and Leavis’s respective attitudes to their mutual place of
work, the University of Cambridge, and to the British higher education
system in general. Now considered a key figure in the history of
Cambridge English, Leavis spent much of his early career in positions
with relatively low professional status, serving as a probationary
lecturer and supervising students at a number of different
colleges.[^166] His biographer, Ian MacKillop, summarises the precarity
of Leavis’s position: ‘Leavis’s probationary lectureship ran out in
October 1931. Not until 1936 did he gain a lectureship again, and then
only a part-time one. He was kept on “part work” until 1947, when he was
over fifty years old.’[^167] Leavis was not made a fellow at Downing
until 1936, at the age of 41, five years after starting work at the
college.[^168] His most important critical work, meanwhile, was not
printed by Cambridge University Press until the 1960s, appearing instead
in the pages of *Scrutiny*, through Gordon Fraser’s appropriately named
Minority Press, or through metropolitan publishers such as Chatto &
Windus. Despite this notable lack of formal institutional support for
the Leavisian project, Cambridge was nevertheless the community in which
that project took shape, and therefore came to mean something particular
to its participants: Anderson describes Leavis’s ultimate conception of
the city and its university as a sort of ‘meta-Cambridge’. In *Scrutiny:
A Retrospect*—published, ironically, by CUP in 1963—Leavis makes the
ambivalence clear:

> \singlespacing Only at Cambridge could the idea of *Scrutiny* have
> taken shape, become a formidable life and maintained the continuous
> living force that made it hated and effective. It was (to deepen the
> emphasis) a product, the triumphant justifying achievement, of the
> English Tripos. I express, and intend to encourage, no simple
> parochial enthusiasm or loyalty in dwelling on these truths. I had
> better, in fact, add at once the further testimony that Scrutiny
> started, established itself and survived in spite of Cambridge.[^169]

\noindent In many of Prynne’s early letters to Olson and Dorn, he
expresses extreme anxiety about his developing academic career. This is
especially the case in a June 1963 letter to Dorn, in which he reveals
that ‘this college \[i.e. Caius\] has just decided to turn me into a
Tutor, college lecturer, official fellow, and next year Director of
Studies. It’s like getting called to the White House, at the tender age
of twenty-six; it feels like death.’[^170] Prynne characterises the
offer as a result of ‘circumstances latch\[ing\] on to my own petty
capacities for routine ambitiousness’ and briefly raises the possibility
of rejecting it in order to avoid ever having to make ‘compromising
decisions \[…\] on behalf of others’; ultimately, however, he is
fatalistic in discussing the supposed inevitability of acceptance: ‘It
would make no sense to walk out, smash back to a more elemental
predicament, since this is not in my nature. Or so I tell myself. Merely
to have deliberated in these terms would seem to me to have reduced the
possibility to a level of contrived irrelevance.’[^171] Importantly,
Prynne presents his acceptance of the offer as an all-or-nothing
decision: ‘I’d not be capable of not doing \[*sic*\] what is required
with less than complete care; I respect the young too much, and know
that they need their opportunities placed very accurately before
them.’[^172] This attitude reappears clearly in almost every letter in
which Prynne mentions his teaching duties: while he is often critical of
what the English Tripos requires him to teach and is invariably
exhausted by the obligations of supervisions and marking, he is
nevertheless fully committed to the intellectual development of his
students and obviously sees the university as at least a potential site
for real literary education.

A sense of Prynne’s broader attitude towards the university as an
institution can be gleaned from another set of letters to the *Times
Literary Supplement*. In August 1963, Prynne wrote a letter to the
editor responding to a leader article that had appeared in the
newspaper’s 9 August edition. Titled ‘The Library’s Place’, the article
concerned the issue of public funding for university libraries, the
context being the rise of the new, so-called ‘plate glass’ universities
and the imminent publication of the Robbins Report, which was to give
the official seal of approval to this unprecedented expansion of the
British higher education system. The author lamented the ‘general
parsimony of financial support’, arguing for a co-operative acquisitions
system comparable to the United States’ Farmington Plan, which would
allow newer and smaller libraries to build up strengths in specialist
areas.[^173] For the twenty-seven-year-old Prynne, who had recently
completed his first academic year as a fellow at Caius, Clark’s leader
carried a note of bias. ‘You suggest that the prospect ahead is
“especially ominous for the less ancient, the recently established, the
several merely nascent universities and colleges”’, writes Prynne; ‘and
it is just possible that this may be taken to imply that all is
(relatively) well in the case of our major and long-established
university libraries’.[^174] He proceeds to disabuse Clark of this
notion, citing two letters from the University Librarian at Cambridge
and ending on a note that can leave no doubt about his position:

> \singlespacing Even granted the prevailing parsimony in the allocation
> of public funds to education as a whole, there seem at least grounds
> for disquiet over the internal distribution of funds within ancient
> and modern universities alike. Terms are relative, but the values to
> which they refer should be stable enough to withstand bureaucratic
> erosion; and when in the midst of an affluent society the University
> Librarian of a major and long-established centre of learning is forced
> to plead “exiguous funds”, it seems likely that the situation is in
> need of fairly radical review.

\noindent That Prynne refers to distribution of funds ‘within’ rather
than ‘between’ universities is important to note: this is not a call to
take a hammer to the new plate glass, and there is nothing like the
absolute contempt that had been expressed towards Robbins in the
conclusion of Leavis’s ‘Two Cultures?’ the previous year.[^175]
Nevertheless, there is a characteristic appeal to antiquity and a sense
that the country’s ‘major and long-established centre\[s\] of learning’
embody certain ‘values’ that are, if not timeless, at least
longer-lasting and certainly more important than those of politics and
bureaucracy. This view is certainly consonant with Leavis’s conception
of the university as ‘a real and vital centre of consciousness’ and his
opposition to ‘the publicizers, public relations men, heads of houses,
academic ward-bosses, hobnobbers with Cabinet ministers, who are
planning, they tell us, to remodel the University and start going a new
kind of higher education.’[^176]

Prynne’s *oeuvre* contains a number of texts by which the persistence of
this attitude may be tested. The most convenient is an intervention in
an official debate held at the Cambridge University Senate House between
the release of the Browne Review’s report, ‘Securing a Sustainable
Future for Higher Education’, in October 2010 and the publication of the
coalition government’s White Paper on higher education reform in June
2011.[^177] To the extent that this period involved intense public
discussion about the future of the British (or, more properly, English)
university system, it may be taken as comparable to 1963. Prynne decries
what he sees as the government’s opportunistic use of the 2007–08
financial crisis as a premise for cuts: ‘The current financial crisis is
in historical terms a local aberration; yet over-eager and reckless
exploitation of the justification it apparently offers, to ransack
universities and override their delicate autonomies, can surely inflict
deep and permanent damage.’[^178] He also appeals repeatedly to the
University of Cambridge’s leadership role in opposing government policy.
There is a strong sense here of the very same small-‘c’ conservatism
that was apparent in 1963. In phrases such as ‘delicate autonomies’ and
‘core values’, Prynne slips into the sort of grandiloquent but
ultimately empty language that he himself parodied in 1969 with the
phrase ‘manifest emergence | of valued instinct’, affirming an
arm’s-length principle of university regulation that cannot but
implicitly justify the *status quo*: all change is bad change.[^179]

If the analysis above is correct, then Prynne’s relationship with
Cambridge appears to be broadly similar to Leavis’s. Leavis began as an
outsider trying to get in; he ultimately succeeded, but was never fully
co-opted by the institution. Prynne, on the other hand, began as a
somewhat reluctant insider. Though he later adopted a more oppositional
stance which would see him remain permanently eccentric to the real
centres of academic power, he has nevertheless maintained a basically
conventional view of the role of the university in society—in other
words, as an autonomous intellectual community bound by its own rules
and traditions, which is frequently in need of protection from
bureaucratic state intervention.[^180] Writing to Dorn in 1972, Prynne
declares that Cambridge ‘should never have’ given him a permanent job as
he ‘won’t ever produce the gavotte required’.[^181] While this is true
if the ‘gavotte’ is taken to refer to the careful dance of professional
advancement through publishing, there is no doubt that through teaching,
lecturing, librarianship and general ‘committee work’, Prynne has more
than fulfilled the basic obligations of a Cambridge don, and has even
gained a certain level of academic influence. Despite apparent
differences, then, Prynne and Leavis share a fundamental ambivalence
towards academia in general and Cambridge in particular. Does it
therefore follow—or is it at least plausible—that Prynne’s teaching,
like his early criticism, has been Leavisian in character? Discussing
the legacy of Practical Criticism, the method of textual interpretation
developed by I.A. Richards and taken up enthusiastically, though with
modifications, by Leavis, Sam Solomon refers to a 2004 document produced
by Prynne for incoming students at Caius, ‘Tips on Practical Criticism,
for Students of English’. This text, argues Solomon, articulates ‘a
tutorial pedagogical authority with a form of preparatory moral
training’, and is as such ‘quite continuous’ with the work of Richards
and Leavis, but this isn’t its only function: ‘there is also a movement
within this document against the grain of its structural pedagogical
purpose, toward a consideration of the literary text and of critical
reading as already social processes and spaces and of reading and
writing as forms of labor that produce value.’ In fact, ‘Prynne
foregrounds the limitations that attend the Arnold–Richards–Leavis
emphasis on the preparatory nature of literary study as moral training
for citizenship.’[^182] Solomon’s reading is accurate, but it is
important to note that the original focus on ‘preparatory moral
training’ is absolutely not confined to this one text. In a postscript
added in 2006 to another 2004 piece, ‘Tips on Reading’, Prynne makes his
position on the moral aspect of a literary-critical education absolutely
clear:

> \singlespacing I add also this postscript, because your
> responsibilities to whatever long-term benefits you derive from
> reading with insight and enhanced understanding some of the world’s
> finest books do not end as you depart from Caius. When you read and
> sing to your young children at bed-time, and buy them picture-books
> for their early birthdays, remember how susceptible are those of
> tender years and how much your example will mean to them. If you read
> aloud to them with humour and truth, and prefer reading matter (choose
> it yourself) which is not slick child-fodder even when simple and
> direct and pitched right for young minds; and do not allow them to be
> drawn into a fear or scorn of poetry, and take them all to Christmas
> pantos which offer sparks of witty imagination, and give good
> book-presents to nieces and family because you shew that you care
> about them (both the recipients and the books); then part of the
> longer-term inwardness of your literary education, a far cry from
> writing essays and splitting critical hairs, approaches thus a
> fulfilment which will start to transmit deep values across the
> generations. That’s called being human. Then later you can lure them
> into kids’ libraries and bookshops, buy them writing-notebooks in
> which they can compose stories to read back to you, and songs to sing
> and little playlets for family festivals, and so make all this a
> natural part of their young lives; and of yours also.[^183]

\noindent The evident sincerity of this text makes using it to shore up
a scholarly point about Prynne’s intellectual influences seem churlish.
Yet perhaps this feeling is itself symptomatic of a strong moral strain
not only in Prynne’s work but also in work on Prynne. This strain is
certainly not pure Leavis, but it seems clear that it owes at least
something to the editor of *Scrutiny*.

v. Conclusion
-------------

This chapter has argued for the recognition of Leavis as an early
influence on Prynne, based on the content of prose works such as ‘The
Elegiac World in Victorian Poetry’ and on the style of Prynne’s
engagement with certain literary and political issues, most obviously in
his correspondence. This influence should not be surprising given that
Leavis’s critical work and opinions enjoyed wide circulation throughout
Prynne’s school and college years, yet Leavis was selected as an
interesting figure for comparison precisely because the connection is so
rarely made: aside from Solomon, whose comments are in any case
incidental to his overall argument, no critic appears to have
investigated the link. This lack of interest is reflective of the
overall paucity of scholarship on Prynne’s early career, discussed in
the Introduction to this thesis. As was noted, this is not a paucity
which can be attributed solely to the inattention or perversity of
individual critics: Prynne’s withdrawal from commercial publishing and
his obvious shift in poetic style following *Force of Circumstance*
create an unavoidable sense of rupture in his career, and it is not
surprising that many scholars have followed the guidance of their
subject in steering their attention towards the later work. One of the
implicit arguments of this chapter has, however, been that Prynne’s very
earliest influences are worth studying precisely because they remain
relevant throughout his career. How can this claim be reconciled with
Prynne’s demonstrable abandonment not only of a number of important
Leavisian critical positions but also of the literary world represented
by Davie?

A clue may be found in two relatively unknown essays by Davie, published
in the journal *Twentieth Century* in 1953 and 1954—following the
publication of *Purity of Diction* but before J.D. Scott’s coinage of
‘the Movement’—and not subsequently collected. In the former,
‘Academicism and Jonathan Swift’, Davie takes a reprint of Ricardo
Quintana’s *The Mind and Art of Jonathan Swift* (1936) as the occasion
for a disquisition on the relationship between scholarship and pedantry,
intervening in the criticism–scholarship debate that was then raging
between Leavis and F.W. Bateson in the pages of *Scrutiny*.[^184]
Defending Quintana against the apparently common view that his book is
‘earnest, exhaustive, pedestrian, largely irrelevant but, for its minor
virtue of accuracy about facts and dates, indispensable’, Davie
contrasts its in fact quite subtle analysis with the banal pedantry of a
more fashionable book by the critic John M. Bullitt, *Jonathan Swift and
the Anatomy of Satire* (1953).[^185] His point, which he makes with
reference to Leavis, is that ‘donnishness’ is a much less stable epithet
than is commonly assumed, and that the characteristics which it denotes
(principally pedantry) often apply to self-declared works of criticism
more than to those of academic scholarship. Davie admits that, to an
increasing extent, ‘instead of the professional man of letters we have
the professional critic, the young don writing in the first place for
other dons, and only incidentally for that supremely necessary fiction,
the common reader.’[^186] Yet he presents the work of Leavis and
*Scrutiny*, approvingly, as a sort of academic entryism, keeping
criticism pure from inside the ivory tower:

> \singlespacing The work of Dr Leavis and his collaborators in
> *Scrutiny* over the past twenty years is of enormous importance to
> anyone seriously interested in the future of British and European
> culture. And in our period, when the treasures of that culture are
> passing more and more for safe keeping into academic hands, it is one
> of the most hopeful signs. For it means that the most mordant and
> salutary criticisms of academicism have come, and are coming, from
> inside the academic world itself.[^187]

\noindent Leavisism as Davie understands it is, moreover, not a matter
of strict adherence to a set of critical rules: ‘Any method, however
shaky its basis in theory, is justified by results. The wrong approach
can give the right results. Hence Dr Leavis has no method. It is his
self-styled disciples who have constructed a method which they put
forward and practise as his.’[^188]

In the second essay, titled ‘Is There a London Literary Racket?’ after
the well-known *Scrutiny* editorial ‘The Literary Racket’, Davie
diverges from Leavis. Having restated his point about the shift in
literary authority from the ‘the professional man of letters’ to the
young don in the provincial university, Davie nevertheless admits the
continued existence of a highly effective and exclusive metropolitan
publicity machine which poses a ‘terrible threat’ to the maintenance of
literary standards: ‘When the racketeers emerge the machinery is ready
for them to use.’[^189] He goes on to argue, in effect, for the gradual
upgrading of that machinery into a real literary culture through more
robust reviewing rather than for its summary dismantling. This is the
point on which Davie breaks with Leavis, characterising the latter’s
position as one of ridiculous fundamentalism:

> \singlespacing [What] he asks and hopes for \[…\] is that dons will
> keep themselves free from contagion, writing only for such exacting
> organs as *Scrutiny*, and refusing to broadcast or to review for a
> weekly or a Sunday paper. \[… H\]is bitterest scorn is reserved for
> those who, on the Third Programme or in the weeklies, can be shown to
> voice opinions or to use methods derived from *Scrutiny*.[^190]

\noindent At this stage, then, Davie’s position can be summarised as the
advocacy of a long march through the cultural institutions, grasping the
spirit of *Scrutiny* in a non-dogmatic fashion and using it to bring
critical rigour to venues which Leavis himself, at least in the mid
1950s, would not have touched with a barge pole. This attitude can be
usefully compared to Prynne’s, considered at length above. As has been
shown in relation to Shelley, Prynne clearly abandoned certain Leavisian
strictures—notably Leavis’s opinion of the limited role of metaphor—in
his critical writing from the late 1960s onwards. Yet if Davie is right
to state that ‘Dr Leavis has no method’ and that attempts to claim
otherwise are the illegitimate protestations of ‘self-styled disciples’,
then this shift need not be characterised as a fundamental break.
Rather, Prynne’s critical work can be seen to exist on a spectrum of
Leavisian influence, much as his attitude to the university shares
elements of Leavis’s view while also differing in several respects.
Crucially, this mode of critical relation to Leavis, for all its
apparent incompleteness, is implied by Davie to be *more* Leavisian than
slavish adherence. What of the second part of Davie’s position, that
which relates to cultural institutions? Here, there is no such get-out
clause: in contrast to the question of critical methods, this is one
which demands a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answer. Can the machinery of publicity be
made to serve the cause of real literary standards? Leavis answers with
an emphatic ‘no’, Davie with a tactical ‘yes’. Prynne’s position is more
variable, appearing as a ‘yes’ during his early years as a published
poet and especially in his attempts to promote Olson and Dorn to English
readers, but quickly shifting to a strong ‘no’ which would waver very
little over the course of the next four-and-a-half decades.[^191] Prynne
is in this respect more properly Leavisian than most of the so-called
Leavisites, and certainly more so than any member of the Movement
(including Davie), whose supposed affinity with Leavis is really more
socio-cultural than intellectual. As Thomas Mallon puts it in a review
of Blake Morrison’s *The Movement* (1980), ‘if the Sitwells, in Cyril
Connolly’s famous phrase, belong more to the history of publicity than
poetry, the Movement members may ultimately belong as much to the
sociology of education as to a history of literary values.’[^192]
\newpage

Chapter 2. ‘The inter-modifying force of open argument’
=======================================================

i. Introduction
---------------

Periodicals have played a crucial role in the distribution both of
Prynne’s poetry and of his prose over the course of the last five
decades. Yet the category ‘periodical’ is a broad one, stretching to
encompass everything from photocopied ‘zines’ to academic journals, from
national newspapers to the annual records of Oxford and Cambridge
colleges. This chapter will focus on one specific form of periodical,
the little magazine, examining Prynne’s engagement with this form—and
with the social and literary *milieu* which attends it—throughout his
early career. It will then consider the interaction between this
publication context and Prynne’s prose, described in the introduction to
this thesis as the most contextually transparent of his work, using the
foregoing analysis to provide a detailed reading of the 1967 piece ‘A
Note on Metal’. Chapter 1 concluded that, by virtue of his rejection of
the machinery of mainstream poetic publicity in the mid-to-late 1960s,
Prynne is ‘more properly Leavisian than most of the so-called
Leavisites’; it will be the task of the present chapter to determine
what this rejection means in practice. As in the discussion of Davie and
Leavis, special attention will be paid to periodicals and points of
contact which may have been overlooked in previous accounts, whether as
a result of the bias towards transatlantic influence that has already
been described or simply due to the lack of existing archival research
on the very earliest stages of Prynne’s career. Before developing any
sort of argument, however, it will be necessary to provide a provisional
definition of the little magazine.

Long a neglected area of literary studies, little magazines have
experienced renewed academic interest in recent years. The publication
of David Miller and Richard Price’s *British Poetry Magazines 1914–2000:
A History and Bibliography of ‘Little Magazines’* in 2006 coincided with
the beginning of Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker’s Modernist Magazines
Project, which has since resulted in an online archive of scanned
journals and the publication of three substantial reference volumes
covering magazines in Britain and Ireland, North America and continental
Europe.[^193] These new resources come on top of a number of existing
bibliographical and critical works, many of which are listed in Price’s
selected bibliography of little magazine scholarship.[^194]
Nevertheless, there remain regions of obscurity. One such region is
occupied by little magazines published in Britain from the 1960s
onwards, which are excluded for reasons of chronology from Brooker and
Thacker’s 2009 volume. Miller and Price’s largely bibliographical work
on these periodicals supplements valuable oral history undertaken by
Wolfgang Görtschacher, notably in his *Little Magazine Profiles*
(1993).[^195] Nevertheless, that one of the key resources in the field
remains a Ph.D. project produced by an Austrian scholar more than two
decades ago is itself suggestive of the lack of critical attention to
these magazines in Britain. Given the dates of Prynne’s poetic activity,
this is clearly problematic for any scholar of his work.

For the purposes of this chapter, the little magazine is understood to
be a periodical concerned primarily with literature (generally poetry),
produced cheaply by volunteers formally independent of any external
institution and distributed for a short period of time to a small group
of subscribers, either for free or for a small fee.[^196] Production
costs, pricing, length of operation and subscriber numbers are all
relative terms and it would be futile to impose any absolute upper limit
on any of them. Nevertheless, their consistent minimisation across the
field of little magazine production points to a single determinant,
which can be identified as non-commerciality. Any little magazine which
is sold for a fee may, strictly speaking, be considered a commodity.
Nevertheless, it is a relatively consistent feature of little magazines
that they strive constantly to escape the commodity form, either by
being given away for free or, if this is not financially viable, by
minimising the proportion of surplus value returned to their producers
after sale (a proportion which, in any case, rarely exceeds the amount
necessary to produce the next issue of the magazine). Contributions to
the running of a little magazine often take the form of relatively
unmediated provision of the materials for production and distribution,
e.g. the use of a mimeograph machine or a book of postage stamps. As a
result of this dislocation from the world of commercial publishing,
little magazines of the type with which this chapter is concerned rarely
carry advertising, though there are exceptions to this rule, notably
*Prospect*. These criteria constitute a rough practical or economic
definition of the little magazine. There is, however, a further,
ideological level to consider before the concept will come fully into
focus. Little magazines have historically been associated with
modernism—specifically, with the long canonical period of Euro-American
modernism extending roughly from the beginning of the First World War to
the end of the Second. As such, the attempt to define the little
magazine in the 1960s and ’70s encounters many of the problems inherent
in defining ‘late modernism’, a term which is frequently applied to
Prynne’s work—including on the dustjacket of his collected poems—but
rarely in a critical or self-reflexive fashion.

The most detailed study of the term in specific relation to Prynne is
provided by Mellors’s *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne*, a
work whose subtitle suggests the broad outline of its argument: that the
‘impersonality, eclecticism, linguistic playfulness and Hermetic rigour’
of Prynne’s poetry descends in a linear fashion from the work of Ezra
Pound, via that of Charles Olson, and that the whole phenomenon can be
described as late modernist in character.[^197] Yet Mellors also
provides an external, logistical definition of the category to
complement this narrative of internal aesthetic development. Introducing
the section of the book which concerns Prynne, he notes that ‘\[t\]he
real and imaginary divisions between modernist and anti-modernist camps
run very deep in British literary culture and have only recently begun
to seem archaic’:

> \singlespacing While in the final analysis the distinction between
> ‘mainstream’ and ‘alternative’ poetry is bogus, the view taken by the
> institutions and prize-giving bodies that have evolved since the 1950s
> has been one of pull-quote respect for the great modernists
> accompanied by unwavering contempt for ‘foreign’ experiments carried
> out by British poets.[^198]

\noindent It is this separation—an intellectually ‘bogus’ distinction
which has taken on the character of reality through the sheer fact of
continued enforcement—with which this chapter is partly concerned,
accepting the essential arbitrariness of the disjunction while
investigating the real effects that it has exerted, particularly on the
work grouped under the ‘alternative’ side of the equation.[^199] Mellors
goes on to link this situation directly to the non-commerciality of
small presses and little magazines: ‘While the small press might not be
entirely free from the process of exchange, it nevertheless represents
an alternative to the market-led interests of established publishing
houses.’[^200] Reading ‘little magazine’ for ‘small press’, we can thus
clarify the definition of the late modernist little magazine in Britain
as one which exists in a specifically antagonistic relationship to
mainstream poetry publishing: not so much non-commercial, then, as
*anti*-commercial, rejecting exchange—if not fully, then as far as
possible—as part of a deliberate strategy of contestation. Crucially,
Mellors presents Prynne’s involvement with these magazines as equally
deliberate, rather than simply as the result of his exclusion from other
channels: ‘Where other poets hoped to work their way up from little
magazines and presses to gain greater recognition with Faber, Cape,
Oxford University Press, and other major publishers, Prynne reversed the
process, placing higher value on small-scale enterprises.’[^201]

The signs of this deliberate effort at reversal are visible as early as
1963, when in a letter to Ed Dorn Prynne recounts a conversation with
his Caius colleague, the biologist Francis Crick. Prynne is pleasantly
surprised by Crick’s familiarity with new developments in American
poetry, but relays a reservation: ‘what he did see as less obviously
helpful in the long run was the positive *need* for social & cultural
resistance, since while it functioned as a means of enhancing the
concentration of effort and serious practice, it also encouraged a
defensiveness and stridency of tone which tended to shatter the firm
centre.’ Having followed this train of thought, however—‘if the reaction
to resistance (real or imagined) distorts the shape of the utterance,
then this is the poet’s responsibility, for not having stepped into a
wider & more open space’—his concluding question sounds a note of
hesitation: ‘what happens when this resistance—the necessity of marginal
status within the overall context—disappears from the scene
(Ph.D. theses and big publishers): will this operate as a liberation or
as a more desperate extremity?’[^202] Though the grammar of this
sentence (‘when’, ‘will’) appears to present mainstream publication and
academic recognition as inevitabilities, the very fact that it is asked
holds open the prospect of continued resistance; and as the course of
Prynne’s own later career suggests, ‘Ph.D. theses’ do not always go
hand-in-hand with recognition by the ‘big publishers’.

The clearest way to represent Prynne’s overall involvement with little
magazines is visually. Figure @fig:mags maps almost every periodical in
which Prynne’s poetic work has been published, linking them to the books
in which the same work was subsequently collected.[^203] One of the
principal uses of this mode of visualisation is as a tool to investigate
the periodisation of Prynne’s poetry, discussed at the beginning of the
previous chapter. For example, the severing of *Force of Circumstance*
from Prynne’s later work is apparently confirmed by the lack of
connections between the five publications in which its poems
appeared—*Lyrische Hefte*, *Prospect*, *Satis*, *Mica* and
*Tomorrow*—and subsequent collections of the 1960s such as *Kitchen
Poems* and *The White Stones*. On the other hand, the status of the
supposed second break between *The White Stones* and *Brass*—or,
alternatively, somewhere in the middle of *The White Stones*—is
altogether less clear: whatever its aesthetic ruptures, Prynne’s poetry
from the late 1960s to the mid 1970s seems to be bound together by a
relatively coherent web of periodical publication. Meanwhile, the books
proposed by Sutherland as representative of Prynne’s ‘late style’—‘from
*Red D Gypsum*, published in 1998, to the latest, *Kazoo Dreamboats*,
from 2011’—are conspicuous by their absence from the diagram, not having
received magazine publication at all, suggesting a sort of negative
coherence in independence.[^204]

Diagrams such as Figure @fig:mags should not, however, be treated as
absolute standards against which the truth or falsity of various
periodisation schemes can be measured. This is particularly the case
when it comes to an object of study as internally heterogeneous as
Prynne’s career, which, as it is one of the key aims of this thesis to
emphasise, cannot simply be reduced to a series of chapbooks or to the
large yellow volume of the collected poems. When prose is considered
alongside poetry, some of the structures outlined in Figure @fig:mags
begin to break down: where, for instance, does ‘Tomorrow is Fade Out
Night’ fit, being a review of Douglas Woolf’s novel *Fade Out* (1959)
printed in *Prospect* in 1964, well after Prynne had repudiated his
poetic style in *Force of Circumstance* but before the shift had been
confirmed by the publication of *Kitchen Poems*?[^205] In order to flesh
out the skeleton represented by Figure @fig:mags, it will be necessary
to provide an overview of Prynne’s relationships with little magazines
from as early as the 1950s. Given the restriction of the scope of this
thesis to Prynne’s early career and the significant work that has
already been done on his involvement with *The English Intelligencer*,
this account will concentrate primarily on the period from 1955 to the
first issue of the *Intelligencer* in 1966.[^206]

ii. Prynne and little magazines, 1955–66
----------------------------------------

Prynne’s involvement with little magazines began as early as his time in
the sixth form at St Dunstan’s College, where in 1955 he was
instrumental in the revival of a school publication, *Six*, which had
last appeared in 1948. Billed as ‘an unofficial production undertaken by
members of the Sixth Form’, *Six*’s 1955 issue was edited by Prynne, and
it therefore seems fair to assume that its brief, unsigned editorial
statement was also written by him.[^207] This statement is conspicuous
in its desire to place the issue within a long-running tradition, or at
least one that might seem long-running to a sixth-former. According to
the school’s archivist, the magazine had ‘appeared sporadically from the
1930s’ onwards, a run which the teenage author describes as ‘almost
legendary’.[^208] He then proceeds to generalise about previous editions
of *Six*—particularly those produced during the Second World
War—claiming that ‘\[a\] generation stands mirrored in \[their\] pages’:

> \singlespacing it may not perhaps be too rash to detect in comparison
> with \[the present issue’s\] forbears, a paradoxically more balanced
> and less adult approach to life. The accelerated maturity forced on
> the war generation has gradually relaxed its grip; and the recondite
> earnestness and cynical obscurantism of the war-time SIX’s rings
> slightly strange to a generation which has never been forced face to
> face with the bitter futility of war.[^209]

\noindent The point of this comparison might seem to be to distance the
1955 cohort from their wartime equivalents, men of Donald Davie’s
generation who would by this point have been well on their way to
positions of adult authority, some perhaps serving as schoolmasters. Yet
there is also, in the easy use of the term ‘forbears’, a deliberate
claim to continuity—indeed, the very act of making the comparison
implies that there is something comparable. The author strengthens the
sense of tradition by going on describe the school’s English master,
Basil Harvey, as ‘the spiritual god-father of SIX ever since its first
appearance’, before expressing hope that the revived magazine ‘will not
die an early death \[…\] will not sink back into oblivion.’[^210] The
1955 issue itself is a striking object. Large post quarto in format, the
issue’s content is mimeographed from typewritten stencils, while the
front cover is reminiscent of the July 1915 ‘war number’ of *Blast*,
featuring a large, capitalised title above a bold monochromatic print.
The latter shows a delta-wing jet aircraft similar to early designs for
the Avro Vulcan, seemingly balancing on its nose in front of a Greek
temple, from the base of which emanate stylised rays of the sort
featured on the Japanese Rising Sun Flag. When viewed next to this
print, the issue’s Italian inscription, ‘*sesta forma giornale*’
\[‘sixth form journal’\], perhaps suggests an attempt to situate the
magazine in a Futurist context, though stray words in Russian and Greek
raise the possibility of a more prosaic adolescent cleverness.
Linguistic facility is evident in the issue’s content, too: of the 13
poems and prose pieces that make up the magazine, two are in French and
two in German, including Prynne’s own contribution, a translation into
German of Thomas Hood’s Petrarchan sonnet ‘Silence’.[^211]

The magazines to which Prynne contributed as an undergraduate and
postgraduate student are relatively few, but are instructive in their
variety. In 1960, Prynne had two poems published in little magazines:
‘Times Trans-shifting: for Robert Herrick’, which appeared in
*Prospect*, and ‘The Hazel Tree’, which was printed in *Tomorrow*.[^212]
Both founded in 1959, *Prospect* and *Tomorrow* are in many ways mirror
images of each other, with the axis of reflection situated somewhere
along the newly-opened M1 motorway: the former was edited by Elaine
Feinstein, Tony Ward and eventually Prynne himself in Cambridge, the
latter by Ian Hamilton and Susil Pieris in Oxford.[^213] Both had
reached their fourth issue by the second half of 1960, each publishing a
relatively broad range of more or less established poets, though with
almost no actual overlap—aside from Prynne, the only contributor shared
by the two magazines is Harold Pinter. This may testify to the relative
insularity of the university communities which both *Tomorrow* and
*Prospect* represent, or at least the importance of personal contact in
the solicitation of work for publication, although both magazines also
carried work by foreign poets, with *Prospect* becoming known for
championing the new American poetry represented by Olson, Dorn and
Robert Creeley, among others.[^214] The poems contributed by Prynne are
characteristic of his work in *Force of Circumstance* and were
subsequently reprinted on pp. 43 and 44 of that collection, suggesting a
certain affinity between them. The former is a self-consciously
metaphysical meditation on a phrase, ‘lutes of amber’, from Herrick’s
‘Upon Julia’s Voice’, which is printed on the facing page of the
magazine. Prynne begins by bringing Herrick down to earth, questioning
the efficacy of an instrument actually made from amber—‘A sounding-board
needs grain and temper, needs | A latent sympathy for vibrant tone’—yet
goes on to transfer the deficiency to ‘us’:

> \singlespacing Their wood the essence of a former age,\
> Their sound compacted in the golden glow\
> Within their aromatic shapes, would seem\
> Too rich, to us who never took our music\
> Neat, but in smaller doses, over intervals.

\noindent The lapsarian tone of the final three lines makes clear that
the problem is on ‘our’ side of the equation: ‘To contemplate a sound so
rare, complete | Within its glowing moment: this would seem | Denied to
us who have such need of time.’ ‘The Hazel Tree’, by contrast, is more
concerned with direct observation, though it also seems to set up an
opposition between nature and the fallen state of modern man. Prynne
describes a scene consisting of a hazel tree and a ‘spike of bugle’
(*Ajuga reptans*) in ‘a shaded plain’, using the homonymic character of
‘bugle’ to shift into musical terminology—‘Shall I blow a note scored
for trumpet | Set in the key of D major | With green ground-bass?’—and
subsequently to military metaphor:

> \singlespacing From the battlements\
> This may unlock, set loose\
> The right response: officers are meant\
> To be obeyed; fix bayonets,\
> Senses quicken, without question\
> Reflex action . . .[^215]

\noindent This thought is undercut by the statement that ‘there is
always | The hazel tree; pause and reflect’. The purpose seems to be to
counterpose human animation, represented by the bugle, to the tree’s
poise and stillness: ‘Not impaled on action. | Pattern, not movement’.
Later, the bugle is imagined as a ‘stream | Of fluid discourse’, its two
colours forming an ‘Interlinear gloss in two languages’, before the
refrain about the tree is repeated: ‘there is always the hazel tree.’

If Prynne’s very earliest poetic publications remained confined to the
Oxbridge axis, 1961 saw him make contact with little magazines outside
of the British academic *milieu* altogether: *Lyrische Hefte* and
*Mica*. The former, edited by the German poet Arnfrid Astel, printed a
single poem of Prynne’s, ‘Landfall’, a phenomenological consideration of
a bridge which seems to owe much to Martin Heidegger’s 1951 essay
‘Building Dwelling Thinking’ \[‘*Bauen Wohnen Denken*’\]; this
connection is doubly relevant given that one of the key points of
reference for Heidegger’s essay is the *Alte Brücke* in Heidelberg, the
university town from which *Lyrische Hefte* was published.[^216] In
*Mica*, on the other hand, Prynne found a point of regular contact, with
the American magazine publishing five poems and a letter between 1961
and 1962.[^217] This is also the period of Prynne’s involvement with the
British magazine *Satis*, in which he published two poems which would
subsequently be collected in *Force of Circumstance*.[^218] Both *Mica*
and *Satis* can be considered offshoots of the much more well-known
*Migrant*, which ceased publication in 1960, though they differ
significantly from each other both in format and in content.[^219]
Importantly, *Satis*—a conspicuously smart publication, professionally
typeset and photolithographed in duodecimo format—has a practical claim
as a forerunner to the 1964 issue of *Prospect*, edited by Prynne and
discussed in detail below. Having sold two sets of three-issue
subscriptions, *Satis*’s editor and publisher, Matthew Mead and Malcolm
Rutherford, ran out of money by the time of the magazine’s fifth issue.
A solution was given in the final issue’s editorial:

> \singlespacing We are indebted to J. H. Prynne, the Editor of
> *Prospect*, for agreeing to our suggestion that subscriptions which
> would not have expired until our sixth number should be filled by
> *Prospect*. All subscriptions which run beyond that point will be
> returned. Any malcontent to whom this arrangement is not agreeable
> should write to us at once. We are sharpening everything.[^220]

\noindent Prynne’s prose piece ‘Resistance and Difficulty’ was published
in *Prospect*’s fifth issue in 1961, while in 1963, having taken over
the management of the publication and having been appointed fellow of
Caius in the meantime, he wrote two reviews for the university
periodical *The Cambridge Review*.

It is not entirely clear whether the *Review* conforms to the definition
of the little magazine given in this chapter’s introduction, being
predominantly a university publication, though not one officially
connected to or overseen by the university, and having a more general
intellectual and academic than literary focus. Nevertheless, it provides
a useful point of comparison. *Force of Circumstance* had been reviewed
in the magazine’s pages in January 1963 by John Rathmell, Prynne’s
former coursemate at Jesus; the next month, Prynne contributed a review
of the American poet Charles Edward Eaton’s collection *Countermoves*
(1962), following this in March with an article on a recent anthology of
German poetry in translation.[^221] Despite this apparently auspicious
start, however, Prynne did not become a regular contributor to the
magazine: when he was commissioned to review Olson’s *Maximus Poems IV,
V, VI* (1968) six years later, a book which Prynne had himself had a
hand in producing, alongside Robert Creeley’s *For Love* (1962), the
reviews were withdrawn after ‘the Literary Editor allowed himself to be
casually insulting about the modes involved.’[^222] Describing the
incident to Peter Riley, Prynne hints at his motives in writing for a
relatively mainstream academic publication such as the *Review*: ‘They
\[i.e. the reviews\] were actually written directly at that benighted
readership, so that now they’re useless: I clearly should never have
allowed myself to stumble into that maudlin and ignoble dependence, and
I regret very much having done so.’[^223] Prynne seems to consider *The
Cambridge Review* as something separate from the broader little magazine
scene and his reviews for the publication as an educational service for
‘benighted’ readers not sufficiently clued-up about contemporary poetry.
In an apparent reference to the informality of little magazine
publication, Prynne celebrates the fact that ‘\[w\]hatever
master-servant exploitations persist and exfoliate in the great world,
we are not at last subject to the patronising imbecilities of
*editors*’.[^224] Even so, it is clear that he maintains as rigorous a
critical attitude towards little magazines as he does to other
publications: in his previous letter to Riley, Prynne describes Andrew
Crozier’s magazine *The Park* (known as *The Wivenhoe Park Review* from
1965–68) as ‘a rigidly passé disservice to our current needs’, and the
fact that the piece on Olson was eventually printed in the latter
publication seems to put it on a par with *The Cambridge Review*.[^225]

As Ian Brinton points out, the gap between Prynne’s assumption of the
editorship of *Prospect* in the latter half of 1961, following the
publication of Issue 5, and the appearance of the magazine’s sixth and
final issue in Spring 1964 was a long one; yet as a result of Prynne’s
decision to include work by both Olson and Dorn in the issue, and his
frequent correspondence with both, a detailed record of the period is
available.[^226] Prynne’s opening letters to the older poets, sent in
November 1961, are both written on stationery stamped with a *Prospect*
emblem and both focus primarily on soliciting work for publication.
Writing to Olson, Prynne seems optimistic about the potential for the
magazine to introduce new energy from North America to an apparently
moribund English poetic scene: ‘though the nature of this place makes it
necessary to pretend that PROSPECT is respectable & harmless, I hope to
print some genuine kinetics now and then, if not more often.’[^227] He
follows this with further details about his hopes for Issue 6,
complaining that ‘\[y\]ou can have no idea how hostile the parochial
mediocrity of an English university can be’ and revealing an intention
to exclude prose contributions from the issue in order to give ‘the
wiseacres’—presumably a reference to reactionary dons of the sort whose
disquisitions might be found in the pages of *The Cambridge Review*—‘no
foothold in prose theory.’[^228] In a short letter to Dorn the same
month, Prynne reiterates this plan, requesting ‘two or three shortish
pieces, or one long piece’ of poetry, though he is more cautious about
*Prospect*’s potential to influence the local intellectual environment:
‘No intention to make clamorous presentation of outrageous new American
things \[…\]. I daren’t, here in the middle of the most god-awful blasé
city full of half-baked sophisticates, simply itching to patronise what
they don’t understand.’[^229] Instead, he presents a deliberately
gradualist approach: ‘I care enough to keep our fragile magazine in
print & circulation, to establish some kind of firm ground out from
which we can then perhaps venture somewhat further. If I had cash & a
private list like ORIGIN, then everything would be very
different.’[^230]

The reference to Cid Corman’s long-running magazine *Origin* (1951–84)
reveals much about Prynne’s hopes for Issue 6 of *Prospect* and beyond.
Prynne had been in correspondence with Corman from June 1961 at the
latest, while working as the Frank Knox Memorial Fellow at Harvard
University, though the informal tone of his first letter suggests
earlier contact.[^231] Having taken over *Prospect*, he wrote to Corman
almost immediately, requesting work from ‘people you can’t print in
ORIGIN but would like to see started in England’, asking Corman to put
in good words for him with Olson, Dorn and Louis Zukofsky, and asking
for general tips about the running of a little magazine. Perhaps most
significantly, Prynne tentatively requests that Corman either send him
the *Origin* subscriber list or print a notice advertising *Prospect* in
a forthcoming issue of the magazine. Despite another reference to the
‘special characteristics’ of the ‘English scene’ and a desire not to see
*Prospect* ‘become simply another stamping ground for new American
writers’, the overall sense of this letter is that Prynne intends the
magazine to become a sort of English *Origin*—not a carbon copy, but a
publication that would take up the spirit of *Origin* and adapt it for
audiences on the other side of the Atlantic.[^232] As he puts it in a
subsequent letter to Corman, poets in Britain need to ‘start again in
ENGLISH, not your enviable US dialect, which our natives *must* draw
from but could never *use*.’[^233]

In a brief note to Olson in February 1962, Prynne mentions delays to
*Prospect* 6, but expresses hope that the issue will be published by
April of the same year.[^234] Writing to Dorn in July, he describes how
the magazine ‘revealed unexpected teeth when I finally took it over, in
the shape of a large bank overdraft’ and claims finally to be on the
verge of publication; by September, however, there are further delays,
‘mainly through difficulties with funds’.[^235] At this point there is a
gap of almost seven months before the next mention of *Prospect*, in a
February 1964 letter to Olson—here, Prynne claims that the magazine is
‘due at the printers in ten days’, though by June it has still not
actually been distributed.[^236] What is most striking about this
period—particularly given retrospective knowledge of the magazine’s
demise—is Prynne’s optimism about *Prospect* as a continuing
institution. Writing to Olson before Issue 6 has been published, he
admits that ‘I am now thinking already about the next *Prospect* after
this one now on the stocks’, suggesting that Issue 7 contain a long
section of the *Maximus Poems*. Prynne is even optimistic about the
Cambridge literary environment, claiming that ‘things are beginning to
happen here. There’s now a range of subversive interest amongst students
I’m in contact with, and I am hopeful of what will follow.’[^237] To
Dorn, he reveals that Issue 6 will be given away for free, ‘as I know
from experience that any other way is squalid and makes no real
financial difference.’[^238] One of Prynne’s clearest statements about
his intentions for the continuation of the magazine in fact comes in an
October 1964 letter to Robert Creeley, a facsimile of which is included
in Dorn’s papers. The statement is worth quoting in full:

> \singlespacing I don’t want to spread \[*Prospect*\] around too
> easily, but to keep it an occasion of value, maybe in part as Cid
> managed with Origin. I shall have to find the expense myself, but
> that’s better, in today’s England, than mimicing the popular press,
> with ads and the glossy format. I hope, that way, there’s something
> here, this side, to be brought out. It’s not before time, anyway. I
> could wish that people here would want to have the sequence of them,
> could write for it and to each other, get clear of the middle class
> “society” idea and the caution which fogs everything at that
> level.[^239]

The tone of this statement is perhaps familiar from the previous
chapter. It is easy enough to imagine the Leavises expressing similar
hopes for *Scrutiny* in the early 1930s, particularly the desire to
transcend ‘the middle class “society” idea’—the word ‘society’ appears
more than 120 times, very often in a pejorative sense, in the two-volume
*Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, rising to an average rate of twice a page
in Q.D. Leavis’s consideration of Edith Wharton.[^240] What is most
important here, however, is the notion of community which seems to
undergird Prynne’s conception of the magazine. His hope is not just that
recipients will write material for *Prospect*, but also that they will
write ‘to each other’, perhaps unmediated by a correspondence page, as
Prynne was at that very moment doing to Creeley. Yet the magazine will
maintain a central, coordinating position within the social network that
it is intended to generate: recipients will ‘want to have the sequence
of them’, presumably in order to trace developments and conversations
across issues, but also as a sort of monument.[^241] It is in this
respect that Prynne’s concern with the aesthetics of *Prospect* becomes
especially relevant. Writing to Olson in March 1964, he notes that
‘\[t\]he format \[for Issue 6\] is quite large and it’s to be fine,
careful printing; I have a young design typographer who takes his tasks
with alert zeal.’[^242] When Issue 6 finally emerged, its production
note boasted that ‘\[t\]he text is set in 10 on 12 Plantin type with
headings in 36 point Grotesque 126 and is printed on Conqueror blue
white laid paper. End papers and wrappers are Swedish Tumba
Ingrespapper.’[^243] Perhaps the most significant decision made by
Prynne was to jettison the advertisements which had crowded the pages of
earlier issues, favouring instead a layout characterised by small text
and plentiful white space. This move was part of a broader
anti-commercial strain in the issue: according to Prynne’s optimistic
editorial statement, ‘\[o\]nly a very small number of copies will be for
sale over a counter; but copies will be sent free of charge to any
person who, out of a real sense of interest, thinks it worth writing to
the editor to ask for them.’[^244]

If there is a model for Prynne’s editorial statement, it is Corman’s
equivalent, printed—like Prynne’s—on the inside back cover of each issue
of *Origin*: ‘ORIGIN is not for sale; it can be had for love, as it
happens, not for money. \[…\] Priority will be offered those who show
concern for the material involved, involved themselves with it, though
not necessarily agreeing with its manner, matter, scope or
delivery.’[^245] There are a number of other factors which make the
conjunction an apt one. *Origin* had been launched in Spring 1951, its
cover billing it as ‘a quarterly for the creative’; this first issue
included Olson’s poem ‘I, Maximus’, which would become the initial
element in the broader *Maximus Poems* project. While subsequent issues
focused on other poets associated with the experimental Black Mountain
College and the Beat movement such as Creeley and Gary Snyder, it would
be fair to say that Olson remained the presiding aesthetic presence
during the earliest years of the magazine, contributing both poetry and
prose—indeed, his letters to the publication between 1950 and 1956 would
subsequently be collected.[^246] *Prospect*, similarly, began with a
significant contribution from Olson—the poem ‘Maximus to Gloucester’—and
published his work again in Issues 4 and 6.[^247] Though not printed,
Olson’s important ‘Letter to Elaine Feinstein’ was also sent during this
period, adding to the sense of his involvement in the intellectual
*milieu* surrounding the magazine.[^248]

In aesthetic terms, *Origin* and *Prospect* also share a number of key
features, both being issued in octavo format for most of their
respective runs (*Prospect* grew slightly with Issue 5 and expanded even
further after Prynne’s takeover) and both being professionally offset
printed. *Origin* and *Prospect* begin to seem even more similar when
compared to the opposite pole of post-war little magazine production:
the mimeographed ‘worksheet’. Although what has been termed the ‘mimeo
revolution’ did not begin in earnest until the 1960s, outlying
publications such as William Carlos Williams and Robert McAlmon’s
*Contact* had pioneered the technique of printing from typewritten
stencils as early as 1920, while magazines like Amiri Baraka’s *Yugen*
(1958–62) had begun to re-exhibit the characteristic combination of
avant-garde poetic content and ultra-low production values in the years
immediately preceding *Prospect*’s launch.[^249] Seen in relation to
this increasingly popular and significantly cheaper method of
production, the decisions made by Feinstein, Ward and Corman to maintain
their respective magazines’ professional formats—or, in Prynne’s case,
radically to boost the production values of *Prospect*—take on the
character of positive artistic statements.

iii. The role of prose
----------------------

The preceding section of this chapter attempted to convey the profound
diversity—formal, editorial, economic—that exists even within the
relatively narrow definition of the little magazine which was proposed
in its introduction. Yet through the deployment of Prynne’s early poetic
career as a connecting thread, it also tried to demonstrate these
periodicals’ interdependence as elements in a broader artistic scene.
The present section will shift focus from the magazines themselves to
Prynne’s conception of the role of prose within those magazines,
examining a disjunction between his intellectual position and his
editorial practice. This gap will then be used to reflect on a specific
prose text, ‘A Note on Metal’, in the following section, turning the
focus back on to the intellectual context of Prynne’s early career.
Having so far been confined to the period leading up to the publication
of the first issue of the *Intelligencer* in 1966, the scope of the
inquiry will now be extended to include this particular periodical.

As the quotations from Prynne’s earliest letters to Olson and Dorn
indicate, his attitude towards prose as editor of *Prospect* was one of
cynicism. His language when describing the magazine presents it as a
fortification which must be protected at any cost from the ‘hostile
\[and\] parochial mediocrity \[of the\] English university’, with ‘prose
theory’ being one of the key tools by means of which ‘the wiseacres’
might gain a ‘foothold’ in its walls.[^250] If radical new American
poetry is to be printed in England, it must speak for itself. Indeed, if
it is truly to speak at all, it can only do so *by* itself, unmediated
either by the mass-produced scholarship of the ‘knowledge industry’ or
by professional criticism—what Prynne describes to Dorn as
‘discussion/speculation about issues, poetic theory, problems of the
writer’—both of which are equally corrupt and decrepit.[^251] Yet there
is one very obvious problem with taking this anti-prose posture at face
value: when *Prospect* 6 was published in Spring 1964, it included
prose. In fact, fully one third of the magazine’s 42 pages are devoted
to it, in a broad array of forms that encompasses fiction, review and
‘poetic theory’, with Prynne himself contributing one of the key pieces
and Davie—a figure who, as Chapter 1 showed, was certainly not immune
from charges of wiseacrey by this point—contributing another. The
potential explanations for this contradiction are twofold: either
Prynne’s original editorial vision for *Prospect* 6 was compromised by
social or economic forces outside of his control (a hint of these forces
is given as early as November 1961, when he tells Corman that ‘pressures
inherited that I can’t side-step’ mean that *Prospect* will have to
carry a review of Davie’s *A Sequence for Francis Parkman*); or his
attitude towards the usefulness of prose did in fact shift between these
early letters and the magazine’s eventual publication.[^252] The
evidence of the issue itself lends weight to the latter explanation.
While the inclusion of Davie’s contribution—a short piece on the
American poet Alan Stephens—might perhaps be attributed to ‘pressures
inherited’ (though it might just as well not), it hardly makes sense to
say the same about Prynne’s own review, of Douglas Woolf’s five-year-old
novel *Fade Out*. Prynne did not even have Woolf’s address in May 1964,
and if he had been under any obligation to review the book by Woolf’s
long-time champion Creeley, it hardly seems likely that he would have
wasted a further four pages of ‘Conqueror blue white laid paper’ on
printing the latter’s short story ‘The Grace’ as well.[^253] Equally, it
is difficult to see how an editor who was so single-mindedly fastidious
about the issue’s design—single-minded to the point of delaying
publication for three years and eventually bankrupting the
magazine—could have tolerated such an obvious compromise on the level of
content.

That Prynne’s conception of the relationship between prose and little
magazines evolved away from the exclusionary rhetoric of 1961 is
confirmed by one particularly revealing letter sent to Peter Riley six
years later. The letter apparently accompanied a copy of the so-called
‘prose issue’ of *The English Intelligencer*, which though edited by
Riley for its second series was substantially produced—in the material
sense of physical duplication, and often in terms of arranging the
content into stencils—by Prynne, with the assistance of both Andrew and
Jean Crozier and John James.[^254] As Latter notes, the worksheet had
under Riley’s editorship been moving steadily away from being simply a
collection of poems and towards the provision of a more comprehensive
range of ‘information’, generally in the form of long letters and other
prose pieces. Interviewed by Latter for a doctoral thesis, James recalls
that ‘the balance between poetry and non-poetry was increasingly skewed.
Towards the end Jeremy \[Prynne\] expressed his dissatisfaction with the
whole thing in no uncertain terms, one night deciding enough was enough.
\[…\] This was the moment of what I refer to … as the Palace Revolution,
the night of 6 December 1967.’[^255] By ‘Palace Revolution’, James is
referring to the removal of Riley from the editorship of the worksheet
by Prynne, Crozier and himself.[^256]

The letter from Prynne to Riley under consideration here can be situated
precisely in the period referred to by James as ‘towards the end’, being
sent in mid September 1967. Riley’s intention to print a formal ‘prose
issue’ had been announced at least twice in previous issues of the
*Intelligencer*; yet once it had been put together in its final form,
Prynne described the collection which he had just sent off to Riley as
‘a weak assemblage, mostly midget fictions or would-be lyric
gestures’.[^257] It is clear that Prynne’s unhappiness with the issue
stems not from the bare fact of printing prose rather than poetry, but
from what he sees as the poor quality of the prose that Riley has chosen
to print (though he may have been choosing from a limited pool): ‘if a
whole culture *supports* itself on its prose (whatever it might aspire
onwards from that base), is this all we have?’[^258] James’s collocation
of the ‘skewed’ balance between ‘poetry and non-poetry’ with ‘Jeremy
express\[ing\] his dissatisfaction’ is therefore misleading; in fact,
Prynne seems to assign a hugely important role to prose, describing it
as nothing less than the ‘base’ of culture. He continues in this vein:

> \singlespacing We can’t & I presume shouldn’t ~~presume~~ expect to
> evolve all our thinking into poems, where the complication of
> *opinion* and the inter-modifying force of open *argument* has to give
> way to the closed form. A poem isn’t “to be disagreed with” and thus
> evolutionary & self-extending: it has a discrete priviledge as
> self-sufficient (“for its own sake”, whatever *that* means), just as
> soon as it’s set down on paper. I would look to prose to expand the
> base, to equip and exercise the person, literally to keep us sane.
> Otherwise we topple into bigotry—our poems, though of course *not*
> considered, *not* level & judged, *must* be right. Prose is the way
> such extension into the world might be less armour-plated, more
> provisional for heaven’s sake, and I don’t mean picturesque short
> stories.

\noindent According to this statement, prose not only *is* the base of
culture, but also serves to *expand* that base according to an
‘evolutionary’ logic: argument and disagreement are implicitly
procreative, generating new members of the community of ideas. Prose is
a form defined by its provisionality—its competence, if not always
willingness, ‘to be disagreed with’—and therefore forms a natural home
for ‘the complication of *opinion* and the inter-modifying force of open
*argument*’. This phenomenon, in turn, through a process which Prynne
describes as ‘exercise’, ‘keep\[s\] us sane’ and prevents ‘us’ from
‘toppling into bigotry’. Though expressed in sweeping terms, this is
hardly a controversial view of the role of argumentative discourse. In
fact, it could be read as a condensation or a restricted prefiguration
of any number of eminently uncontroversial—even liberal—models of
discursive rationality, from the Socratic method to Jürgen Habermas’s
*Theory of Communicative Action* (1981). By the same token, it contains
some common blind-spots, most notably the obscurity of the referent of
the collective noun ‘us’, a group which is able to assume sanity and
freedom from bigotry but which is never formally defined, and which is
by implication fringed by a penumbra of insane bigots.

That Prynne is thinking of prose in specifically political terms is
confirmed by what follows in the letter. Having offered the model above,
he copies out a long passage from Shelley’s *A Philosophical View of
Reform* (1820, first printed 1920), in which the poet attacks Thomas
Malthus’s views on population control, as expressed in *An Essay on the
Principle of Population* (1798). Shelley characterises the ability to
marry and reproduce as ‘the one thing which made it impossible to
degrade \[the poor\] below the beasts’, and later as ‘that property
which is as strictly their birthright as a gentleman’s land is his
birthright’, noting that the desire to reproduce is ‘a propensity which
persons of the most consummate wisdom have been unable to resist, and
which it is difficult to admire a person for having resisted.’[^259]
Prynne seems to concur, telling Riley that

> \singlespacing Here *we* have in our hands the *immediate* instrument;
> and the pathos of Shelley’s tract, noble as it is, urgently has to be
> re-written for us now, with all the hormonal sophistication of
> birth-control & modern demography. Genetic servo-mechanisms and the
> sophistry of current welfare-economics are what we should work our way
> towards, keeping our balance in prose in counterpoise to that *furor
> poeticus* which now so quickly slides into paranoid hysterics.

\noindent What was it that made ‘the pathos of Shelley’s tract’—as
opposed, presumably, to its ethos or logos—particularly relevant at this
historical juncture? It is true that the so-called ‘population debate’
was as alive in the late 1960s as it was at almost any point in its
history. A newspaper report from the same month as Prynne’s letter
describes an academic symposium on ‘Our crowded world’ at which some
participants were accused of inciting ‘a new “anti-population
hysteria”’, while in the United States the Population Crisis Committee
(PCC), founded in 1965, had already achieved some notable successes in
its mission to curb population growth in the developing world.[^260] The
science fiction novel *Logan’s Run* (1967), a dystopian narrative in
which the population level is maintained by executing all citizens at
the age of twenty-one, even shows these concerns seeping into popular
culture.[^261] A more immediate answer can, however, be found in one of
the key pieces of legislation occupying Parliament in the latter half of
1967: the Abortion Bill. Having been introduced as a private member’s
bill by the future Liberal leader David Steel in 1966, the legislation
officially known as the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Bill passed its
third reading in the House of Commons on 14 July 1967, after what *The
Times* reported was the longest sitting in more than 16 years.[^262] Its
key aspect was a broad provision for legal abortion in cases where
continuing the pregnancy would injure the ‘physical or mental health’
either of the mother or of any existing children, within the 28-week
limit set down in the Infant Life Preservation Act 1929. Following the
introduction of a number of amendments in the Lords, the bill was
finally passed on 27 October, with party whips allowing MPs to vote
along lines of conscience.

Prynne’s letter to Riley of 15 September thus sits in the middle of a
period of ferocious political debate about a highly controversial and
complex issue of human reproduction. Yet despite specifying
‘birth-control & modern demography’ as appropriate subjects for
argument, Prynne seems to avoid engaging with the debate from any
recognisable political position.[^263] What, for example, does he mean
by ‘the sophistry of current welfare-economics’? This phrase seems to
refer to the hot topic of ‘selectivity’, i.e. the proposed means-testing
of some state benefits, and could, given the ambiguity of the hinge-word
‘current’, equally have been uttered from a right-wing, anti-welfare
position as from a left-wing, statist one (or even from a more complex
mixture of the two); indeed, the governing Labour Party was not itself
in agreement over the issue.[^264] ‘Genetic servo-mechanisms’ is even
more obscure: is Prynne referring to welfare policy, new methods of
birth control (the female contraceptive pill became available through
the National Health Service in 1961) or even abortion as
‘servo-mechanisms’?—in other words, devices which use negative feedback
to regulate the behaviour of systems, in this case presumably to control
the population level. If he is, then what is his position on the ethical
character of these mechanisms, and what does his use of the word
‘genetic’ imply about the agency of the human beings—primarily
women—involved?[^265]

While the two phrases just considered are given as subjects which ‘we
should work our way towards’, it is far from clear what Prynne intends
to do once ‘we’ reach them. This hesitancy is not, moreover, a necessary
or even a desirable feature of prose according to Prynne’s own earlier
definition, which deliberately downplays the importance of being
‘right’: prose is supposed to be ‘less armour-plated’ than poetry,
remaining constantly vulnerable to attack. Yet there is a countervailing
emphasis throughout the letter: like the reference to ‘sanity’
considered above, the celebration of ‘keeping our balance in prose’
rather than ‘sliding’ through poetry into ‘paranoid hysterics’ seems
directed towards the establishment of a zone of rationality based on an
essentially conventional, clinical definition of mental illness, with
all the problems that such a definition entails. Prynne seems
simultaneously to call for what he elsewhere terms a ‘community of risk’
and for a discursive arena in which participants will carefully ‘keep
their balance’; for a mode of argument in which contributions will be
‘provisional’ and potentially falsifiable, but in which they will not be
‘hysterical’, a term whose gendered etymology and historical usage
cannot be overlooked, particularly in the overwhelmingly male context of
the *The English Intelligencer*.[^266] Most importantly, he establishes
himself as a figure competent to police the border between this
arena—implicitly coextensive with the *Intelligencer*, at least in its
ideal form—and its outside.

This is made clear in a shockingly direct attack on David Chaloner which
follows closely on Prynne’s comments on Shelley. Chaloner had
contributed four pieces to the issue, the last being an account of a
bonfire in slightly purple descriptive prose (‘A smell of damp leaves &
smoke cloaks the octoberal, rusting garden’).[^267] As Chaloner’s
contributions did not completely fill two stencils, Prynne used the
remaining space on the second page to print a quotation from former US
Treasury official Robert Roosa about plans to stimulate liquidity in
global financial markets.[^268] He explained this decision to Riley as
follows:

> \singlespacing The sentimentalism is so hopelessly *irrelevant*:
> Chaloner is the worst, and his last piece is an enormity of
> feeble-mindedness, modish & inert. He may think that the paragraph I
> added below (to ‘fill up space’) was intended as ‘ironic contrast’,
> but its confident & level claim to be firmly talking about the real
> world will steam-roller our lyric adolescent’s flabby little soul into
> a faint stain on the tarmac.

\noindent Prynne here flies in the face of his own *paean* to ‘the
inter-modifying force of open *argument*’: his implicit riposte to
Chaloner is not made on the level of content, through argumentative
discourse, but by means of form, with Prynne relying on his
pseudo-editorial position—a position based on little more than his
having access to a communal college mimeograph machine—to manipulate the
publication’s layout in such a way that it will undermine Chaloner’s
piece. Crucially, through the parenthetical ‘to “fill up space”’, he
effectively admits to Riley that the move is underhand.

In summary, Prynne’s letter to Riley of 15 September 1967 sets out an
ambiguous model for a new sort of prose which, given the events referred
to by James as the ‘Palace Revolution’ and the worksheet’s subsequent
demise after just six more issues, it seems safe to assume was not
achieved by *The English Intelligencer*. Prynne quotes a letter from
Shelley to John and Maria Gisborne, sent while the poet was writing *A
Philosophical View of Reform*, in which he declares that ‘I have
deserted the odorous gardens of literature to journey across the great
sandy desert of politics.’[^269] ‘\[M\]aybe we should take to the desert
as well,’ suggests Prynne—‘honourable Beduins’. His hesitation is
telling, however. Writing to Riley in what is presumably his next
letter, Prynne acknowledges that ‘\[m\]y last note was a bit irritable
I’m afraid, but I was writing a bit under pressure from *interesting*
prose: cannot it too be joined more freely into the world.’[^270] It is
not clear whether Prynne intends the emphasis on ‘interesting’ to be
read in a sarcastic sense, and thus for it to refer to the contents of
the *Intelligencer*, or whether he is referring to some other genuinely
interesting prose—perhaps even the Robert Roosa article—that he was
reading at the time. Whichever interpretation is correct, his subsequent
call for prose to be ‘joined more freely into the world’ seems to
reiterate his wish for a political turn in the *Intelligencer*’s
non-poetic work, as described in the 15 September letter. Yet the
evident failure of this turn to manifest itself cannot be attributed
solely to Prynne’s fellow-contributors. As described above in relation
to Chaloner, Prynne deliberately avoids playing by his own discursive
rules. Moreover, when he does make individual prose contributions to the
*Intelligencer*, they most often take the form of personally-addressed
letters taking on issues of poetics or providing meta-commentary on the
worksheet itself.

This chapter will now move to consider one of Prynne’s longer
contributions to the *Intelligencer*, ‘A Note on Metal’, to determine
whether the apparent dissonance between his claims to Riley and his
actual practice can be more effectively understood. The text will be
read closely as a significant piece of prose in its own right, but will
also be examined in light of Prynne’s conception of the general role of
prose in little magazines.

iv. ‘A Note on Metal’
---------------------

‘A Note on Metal’ is the most widely distributed of Prynne’s prose works
prior to texts such as 2008’s ‘Huts’ and 2010’s ‘Mental Ears and Poetic
Work’, which owe their circulation to the relatively recent phenomena of
the online journal and the easily-sharable PDF file. The work was first
published in *The English Intelligencer* as one of a series of responses
to Peter Riley’s ‘Working Notes on British Prehistory, or Archaeological
Guesswork One’, which had appeared as a supplement at the conclusion of
the worksheet’s first series.[^271] It was subsequently printed in
pamphlet form alongside the poems ‘Aristeas, in Seven Years’, ‘Star
Damage at Home’ and ‘Frost and Snow, Falling’, and has since been
included in every edition of Prynne’s collected poems.[^272] ‘A Note on
Metal’ is, then, a text with more than one context: initially embedded
in the argumentative back-and-forth of the *Intelligencer* described
earlier in this chapter, it has also been presented as supplementary to
a series of poems and as a relatively self-sufficient, ‘standalone’
piece.[^273] It is the first and last of these contexts with which this
discussion is primarily concerned. Both C.D. Blanton and Seeta Chaganti
have examined ‘A Note on Metal’ in detail, while Simon Jarvis, Robin
Purves, Reitha Pattison, Alex Latter, Alistair Rider and Nicholas Royle
have all considered it more briefly.[^274] Without exception, these
accounts use the text as tool to examine some other aesthetic
object—usually one of Prynne’s poems, or, in the cases of Blanton,
Chaganti and Rider, poems by Basil Bunting and Geoffrey Hill,
Anglo-Saxon artefacts and twentieth-century sculpture respectively.
Blanton’s account of the piece is by far the most detailed, situating it
in a political tradition occupied simultaneously by Ruskin and Marx.
Nevertheless, this reading is offered with the ultimate intention of
making a point about poetic practice and form, rather than of
considering the text on its own terms, as prose. Rather than cite a
pre-existing summary of ‘A Note on Metal’ and risk distorting its
analysis in the direction of another scholar’s project, this section
will therefore begin with a fresh paragraph-by-paragraph synopsis,
before undertaking a political reading of the text which will engage
with existing judgements, particularly Blanton’s, where appropriate. The
synopsis will take the more opaque aspects of the text at face value,
leaving their explanation to the subsequent analysis. For the sake of
clarity, however, a rough schematic representation of the piece’s
argument has been provided in Figure @fig:anm.

¶1 (p. 128[^275]): Before the early Bronze Age, property resided
uncomplicatedly in substance, and the ‘most specific carrier for the
inherence of power’ was weight, found most obviously in stone. Stone is
ambiguous, offering both a hard outside and, through erosion or carving,
a protective, sheltering inside, but weight is its crucial property. ¶2
(128): Metals such as copper and tin are more complex, having
‘brightness, hardness \[and\] ductility’ as well as weight. Alloys
abstract property from substance even further, making it formal. The
naturally uneven geographical distribution of metallic elements
encouraged the Sumerians to acquire tin from as far away as Cornwall;
yet there is an obvious difference in intent between this sort of trade
and the physical transportation of the materials for Stonehenge. ¶3
(128): The strength of metal when forged in fire was ‘infinitely more
abstract’ than that of flint or wood and allowed for rapid developments
in hunting, fishing and agriculture. A ‘spiritual’ importance thus
became attached to the sorts of sharp edges characteristic of metal
tools, marking a shift from ‘the history of substance (stone)’ into ‘the
theory of power (metal)’. ¶4 (128–29): That said, this shift may
actually have caused a ‘deeper cultural adherence’ to stone, a material
not primarily related to the practicalities of everyday active life, but
to a different sort of ‘persistence through material
transmutation’—hence its use to mark death. ¶5 (129): Advances in
metallurgy shifted communities more rapidly from hunting to agriculture,
allowing for the idea of ‘place’ and making mining possible. Threshing
of grains encouraged the development of a theory of value even more
abstract than the ‘mixed relativism of substance’ associated with
alloys: a ‘specialised function \[…\] dependent on the rate of
exchange.’ General abstraction of value through metallurgy and otherwise
became the basis for a politics of wealth, with currency objects still
measured by weight rather than by number. ¶6 (129–30): Currency
initially carried a residual sacrality due to ‘the magical implications
of transfer’, but eventually became ‘iconized’, with number replacing
strength or power as the ‘chief assertion of presence’. Because this
sort of currency is best suited to trading over large distances, trade
routes expanded. ¶7 (130): The shift of wealth from power to value can
be seen most clearly in interactions between different societies, e.g.
‘the sea-borne traders of the Eastern Mediterranean and the peoples of
the Anatolian hinterland’. For the latter, wealth was determined by the
power directly to control flocks of sheep, a ‘politics of limit’; the
former ‘were already middlemen’, relying on ‘the trick of abstract
distance between real supply and real demand.’ ¶8 (130): Geographical
factors caused what we know as coinage, representing ‘sheer mercantile
distance’, to first emerge in the Eastern Mediterranean. Croesus further
abstracted value by creating a bimetallic currency system. This
increasingly rapid flight from ‘presence as weight’ allowed for the
development of a ‘complete middle class’ based on the techniques of this
flight, but also of ‘an exilic (left-wing) history of substance.’ ¶9
(130–31): This is a complex and involuted history. Abstraction of value
is not always deleterious and unmediated substance is not always to be
favoured, and is perhaps not even possible at all. Human awareness is
sharpened by some of the ‘shifts’ away from substance, and stone is, in
fact, already abstraction (‘of standing, of balance’). It is not a
matter of identifying the crucial and catastrophic turning point, but of
looking clearly at ‘the increasing speed of displacement which
culminates only later in the critical overbalance of intent.’

As will by now be obvious, Prynne’s style in ‘A Note on Metal’ is highly
telegraphic. The text contains many gaps—not so much gaps in
archaeological evidence, which is amply provided in the series of dense
endnotes, but gaps in argument. Frequently, Prynne will move from the
specific to the general in a transition so sharply telescopic that it
cannot but be disorienting, even for experienced readers of his work. At
other times, he will make use of apparently familiar words or phrases in
radically unfamiliar contexts, rendering already convoluted sentences
even more difficult to parse. Ryan Dobran claims that ‘A Note on Metal’
is a text which ‘fails to explicate or consistently group the various
concepts it discusses; it is patchy and meandering.’[^276] On the
contrary, the text’s difficulty stems precisely from its tightly
compressed structure, a structure which admits gaps (it is ‘patchy’),
but which is far from ‘meandering’—in fact, it is highly organised. This
discussion will now address five key *lacunae* in ‘A Note on Metal’,
with the hope both of further clarifying Prynne’s text and of
approaching the relationship between prose, politics and history which
is to be the ultimate subject of this section. The choice of which gaps
to analyse is necessarily influenced by the contours of the synopsis
given above.

*1. Prynne relies on a number of technical philosophical terms—most
obviously ‘substance’, but also ‘abstraction’ and ‘quality’—without
explaining the context in which they are used, or making any reference
to the intellectual tradition from which they are taken.*

This is perhaps the most serious issue to be confronted in any reading
of ‘A Note on Metal’, with the interpretation of Prynne’s basic
terminology likely to inform almost every aspect of subsequent analysis.
Foremost among the terms used by Prynne is ‘substance’, a concept with a
history almost as long as philosophy itself. In the present context, and
given the established contours of Prynne’s philosophical preoccupations,
its most relevant formulation would appear to be that which derives from
Hegel’s reading of Spinoza. Hegel famously claimed, in his 1805–06
lectures on the history of philosophy, that ‘thought must begin by
placing itself at the standpoint of Spinozism; to be a follower of
Spinoza is the essential commencement of all Philosophy.’[^277] What
made Spinoza important for Hegel was the former’s repudiation of
Cartesian dualism, which resulted in a form of substance monism,
substance being identified with a pantheistic God. For Spinoza, in
Hegel’s reading, ‘\[t\]he true is simply and solely the one substance,
whose attributes are thought and extension or nature: and only this
absolute unity is reality, it alone is God.’[^278] This dissolving of
the Cartesian subject–object divide makes room for Hegel’s more complex
reinterpretation of the subject *as* object, with his emphasis on
dialectically achieved self-consciousness. Prynne’s argument in ‘A Note
on Metal’, however, seems to differ significantly from the Hegelian
perspective. Most obtrusive in this respect is his apparent lack of
concern for subjective self-consciousness or will; or, to reframe it
positively, his persistent concern with the object. Throughout ‘A Note
on Metal’, the direction of argument extends relentlessly from material
conditions to human action. When the latter is described, it is
invariably as a consequence of the former, which goes on in turn to
create further material conditions and further consequences. Croesus may
have created a bimetallic currency system (¶8), but this was the
inevitable result of the availability of the relevant materials, and he
certainly didn’t reflect on his role in the ever-increasing abstraction
of value (or, if he did, this fact is irrelevant). In other words,
Prynne—like Hegel’s most famous reader, Marx—is rigorously materialist
in his approach.[^279] As Sutherland puts it, ventriloquising Prynne,
‘the subject who engrosses the whole of truth is a disgusting
contraption for silencing objects \[…\] and is fundamentally predatory
and imperial in its reach’.[^280]

Why, then, does Prynne use the philosophically loaded term ‘substance’,
when there are plenty of other words—‘matter’, for example—which would
allow him to avoid idealist associations altogether? Why, indeed, does
he not reframe his account in such a way that it would be unnecessary to
name that which is abstracted from, given that any technical
term—‘substance’, ‘matter’, ‘being’—is inevitably already an
abstraction? ‘A Note on Metal’ is, after all, a text which is explicitly
concerned with the deleterious effects of abstraction, making the
reproduction of that process in its own form particularly glaring. It is
possible to offer a preliminary explanation by relating Prynne’s use of
language to his concern for the object described above. For Prynne, as
the early text ‘Resistance and Difficulty’ makes clear, language once
used takes on an ontological status comparable to that of any other
object in the world, contributing to a general ‘resistance’ which is
experienced as ‘difficulty’ and which gives us a form of immediate
knowledge about our surroundings.[^281] This position leads to an
apparently paradoxical situation in which, as Sutherland puts it, ‘the
truth of language \[is\] conceived to exist “prior to” any subject’, if
not in an ontological sense than at least in a cognitive one.[^282] At
the point of composition, then, Prynne is faced with a pre-existing
philosophical vocabulary which is the product, over millennia, of the
very process of abstraction which ‘A Note on Metal’ seeks to chart: ‘A
Note on Metal’ is, in other words, a text which attempts to describe the
conditions of possibility of its own terminology. The word
‘substance’—as with every other word used in the text—may therefore be
seen not only as a tool with which to grasp an object, but also as an
object in itself. From this perspective, Prynne’s choice of this
particular term signifies something concrete about the anti-idealist
trajectory of his argument. The consequences of this position will be
discussed in more detail at the end of this section in relation to the
work of the philosopher Quentin Meillassoux. To lay the foundations for
this discussion, however, it will first be necessary to clear up some of
the more obvious factual and argumentative gaps in the text.

*2. In ¶2, Prynne states that ‘\[t\]he differences between the kinds of
intent supporting the movement of bluestones from Pembrokeshire to
Wessex, and the Sumerian acquisition of tin from Cornwall or Bohemia,
must be obvious.’ It is not immediately clear why it must.*

Since the publication of ‘A Note on Metal’, a number of important
archaeological discoveries have been made concerning both Bronze Age
cassiterite (tin ore) mining in Asia and the origins of the Stonehenge
bluestones, casting doubt on the models accepted by Prynne. Most
notably, evidence has emerged of mining in what are now western
Afghanistan and southern Turkey, potentially stronger candidates for the
source of Sumerian tin than either the Czech Republic or Britain, while
modern chemical analysis has strengthened an existing theory that the
bluestones were transported from Wales to Wiltshire by glacial action
rather than by deliberate human effort.[^283] These discoveries do not,
however, affect the fundamentals of Prynne’s comparison, and may in fact
help to clarify it. Prynne is not primarily concerned with the
particular geographical regions from which materials were sourced, or
even with the distances involved in transporting them from source to
destination, but rather with ‘the kinds of intent supporting the
movement’ (¶2). In the case of Stonehenge, the intent, whether
astronomical or ritual—and whether the stones were transported all the
way from Wales or from a more proximate location—is singular: the stones
were sourced, moved and arranged for a specific reason, and could not
easily have been used for anything else. Sumerian tin, by contrast, is
implicated in a qualitatively more complex web of intentions, some of
which may ultimately have been ritual (the production of bronze
ornaments, for example), but many of which would have been commercial or
proto-commercial and would have involved extensive logical chains: the
acquisition of *x* in order to make *y*, which can then be traded for
*z*, etc. In describing the ‘obvious’ difference between the two
phenomena, Prynne means to point out how these differing intentions are
determined fundamentally by the materials in relation to which they
operate. Tin is a material which facilitates the abstraction of property
through alloying; stone is not.

*3. Prynne’s central concern in ¶3 with the shift from ‘the history of
substance (stone)’ to ‘the theory of power (metal)’ is preceded only by
a very brief and potentially insufficient account of how ‘\[t\]he new
quality of spiritual transfer was concentrated in \[the\] most durable
forms of leading edge’.*

The point here is similar to that which was at stake in the previous
paragraph. Having described the various uses to which forged metal might
be put—ploughshares, arrowheads, fish hooks—Prynne asserts that ‘\[t\]he
new quality of spiritual transfer was concentrated in these most durable
forms of leading edge, seen especially in the flattened motive of
ornament’ (¶3), before using this to support his theory of a general
shift from substance to power. Part of the obscurity of this statement
derives from the specialist sense of the word ‘motive’, which is used—as
it is by V. Gordon Childe, whose work provides one of the key spurs for
‘A Note on Metal’—as a synonym for or variant spelling of ‘motif’ (see
*OED* definition 7[^284]). Even more confusing, however, is the phrase
‘quality of spiritual transfer’: this is the first appearance of the
word ‘spirit’ in the text, and, as with ‘transfer’, it is not at all
clear in what sense it is being used. A reading of the following
paragraph helps to illuminate this passage. Here, Prynne shifts the
focus of the piece back to stone, and refers to certain activities
specifically as ‘extension\[s\] of the body’ (¶4). Importantly, he
implies the existence of a number of different types of extension whose
characteristics are determined by the directions in which they point
relative to the subject—inward (as ‘ego-terms’) or outward (towards
‘enemies or animals hunted for food’ \[¶4\], etc.)—and which reflect
these characteristics back on to the materials that they employ.
‘Spiritual transfer’ can, then, be seen as another term for bodily
extension, also described as ‘persistence through material
transmutation’ (¶4). When used in relation to metal, it serves to
emphasise the phenomenological sense in which subjectivity is always
bound up with its objects: having developed tools of unprecedented power
and effectiveness, humans in some sense *become* those tools, as well as
the abstracting processes through which they are produced.[^285]
‘\[D\]urable forms of leading edge’ (¶3) not only represent the pinnacle
of then-current technological development but also, having been invested
with spiritual content, help to determine future development.[^286]

*4. In ¶5, Prynne claims that ‘\[t\]he threshing of millet or barley
must bring a “purer” and more abstract theory of value; the mixed
relativism of substance leads, by varied but in outline predictable
stages, to value as a specialised function and hence as dependent on the
rate of exchange.’ Again, it is not clear that the various parts of this
statement follow necessarily from each other.*

This sentence is formed of two parts: a blunt, demonstrative clause
followed, after the semicolon, by a more closely argumentative statement
purporting to explain what goes before it. Obscurity is fostered by the
use of logical markers such as ‘must’ and ‘hence’ in close proximity to
highly technical phrases such as ‘the mixed relativism of substance’,
the meaning of which is not clearly explained. In order to clarify
Prynne’s argument, it is necessary to look closely at what distinguishes
the activity of threshing from other pursuits, principally hunting and
fishing, that have already been described. The reference to threshing
follows a description of how systematic agriculture—facilitated by new
metal tools—‘produces the idea of *place* as the chief local fact’ (¶5),
situating communities in fixed geographical spots and making long-term
local activities such as mining practicable. Threshing, by which cereal
grains are separated from their chaff, is even more specifically local
than agriculture in general, requiring a specially flattened and
hardened threshing floor. Crucially, it is also extremely
labour-intensive, ‘absorb\[ing\] as much as a quarter of agricultural
labor input’ prior to mechanisation in the nineteenth century.[^287]
This combination of factors creates a relatively novel situation in
which humans spend large amounts of time creating value (in the form of
edible grains) through a more or less stationary, repetitive activity.
This is at the heart of Prynne’s argument about threshing: that the
relative complexity of the process and its insertion in a long chain of
other processes—sowing, harvesting, milling, etc.—directly encourages
the development of ‘a more abstract theory of value’ (¶5), perhaps even
an implicit labour theory of value. By ‘the mixed relativism of
substance’ (¶5), then, he is referring to the fungibility, or at least
comparability, of properties such as hardness (metal) and edibility
(grain) that emerges from complex processes such as alloying and flour
production, while ‘value as a specialised function’ is the term that
mediates these properties through ‘the rate of exchange’ (¶5).

*5. Prynne appears to suggest in ¶6 that trade routes expanded as a
function of the development of numerable metal currency. This view is
potentially controversial both for factual reasons (as a result of its
emphasis on the role of early coinage in foreign trade) and for what it
seems to imply about technological development and human agency.*

Having described the development of techniques of casting and stamping
bronze, which result in the production of coins standardised by weight
and design, Prynne offers the following observation: ‘In consequence,
trade-routes undergo a dramatic expansion, since mercantile theory
operates with the most conspicuous success when employed over large
inter-cultural distances’ (¶6). He then quotes a passage from Childe:
‘In the Early Bronze Age peninsular Italy, Central Europe, the West
Baltic Coastlands, and the British Isles were united by a single system
for the distribution of metalware, rooted in the Aegean market.’[^288]
Confusingly, this quote and the statement of Prynne’s that precedes it
bear no obvious relation to each other. Using the phrase ‘Early Bronze
Age’, Childe is referring to a period unambiguously *prior* to the
development of stamped coinage described by Prynne, which did not emerge
until *c*. 700 BC at the earliest. Further obscurity is created by the
citation at the end of the previous paragraph of an article by C.M.
Kraay which seems directly to contradict Prynne’s argument.[^289] As
Prynne summarises Kraay’s thesis, which is supported by an analysis of
the distribution of coins between numerous extant hoards, ‘\[e\]ven in
the case of early Greek coinage \[…\] the original intention was not so
much in the first place to facilitate trade (external or internal), but
rather to establish a system of centralised national wealth which could
support a professional military caste’ (n. 3). This knot cannot be
untied as easily as those previously discussed, unless Prynne’s emphasis
in the piece’s final paragraph on indeterminacy—‘\[i\]f we are confident
over the more developed consequences, at the unrecognised turn we are
still at a loss to say where or why’ (¶9)—can be taken as a quite
serious admission of ignorance and a declaration of openness to multiple
explanations, of which Kraay’s is one. Even then, it would seem strange
to provide practically no evidence for one’s own theory while shoring up
a competing narrative in the endnotes.

Ultimately, as with much else in this text, the statement that follows
Prynne’s confident ‘\[i\]n consequence’ must be taken on trust. Even
then, however, the teleology of the argument requires further analysis.
Prynne is not claiming here that coinage was developed *in order to*
facilitate trade; on the contrary, his theory is that ‘inter-cultural’
trade boomed *as a result of* the development of coinage and ‘mercantile
theory’ (¶6). This is an important aspect of the argument in ‘A Note on
Metal’, recalling the earlier emphasis on materials as vessels for
‘spiritual transfer’; for Prynne, metal is not merely a passive object
shaped by a pre-existing human will, but rather the motor and
determinant of human will itself.[^290]

*6. At the end of ¶8, Prynne associates ‘the technique of \[the\]
removal’ from ‘presence as weight’ with the emergence both of ‘a
complete middle class’ and of ‘an exilic (left-wing) history of
substance’. It is not obvious what he means by either of the latter two
terms, or how they relate to each other.*

By this stage of the piece, it is relatively clear what Prynne means by
‘the remov\[al\]’ from ‘presence as weight’ (¶8)—this is the tendency
that has been described throughout ‘A Note on Metal’, according to which
technological developments in metallurgy encourage value to be
constituted in a series of increasingly abstract forms, culminating (for
the time being) in bimetallic systems of stamped metal coins. Yet what
follows this is more obscure: Prynne seems to set up a new, explicitly
political distinction between a ’middle class’ and an ‘exilic
(left-wing) history’, describing the two as being in ‘contrast’ (¶8).
Perhaps the most important stumbling block here is historical: having
just described developments in currency during the reign of Croesus (595
– *c*. 547 BC), Prynne’s use of the terms ’middle class’ and ‘left-wing’
is apt to seem highly anachronistic, even if their emergence is
qualified as merely ‘possible’ (¶8)—this is, indeed, a central issue
with ‘A Note on Metal’, which will be discussed in more detail below.
The most plausible definition of ’middle class’ in this context is a
relatively strict economic one: Prynne is obviously not referring, in
the modern British sense, to an organic combination of professionals and
other white-collar workers with elements of the labour aristocracy, but
rather to a class similar to that which Marx describes as manipulating
‘merchant’s capital’ in historical eras prior to capitalism’s dominance
of the mode of production.[^291]

As for ‘left-wing’, the term’s immediate context—‘an exilic (left-wing)
history of substance’—suggests that it refers to a narrative about the
past produced in the present, rather than to the essence of past social
structures or other forms of life: a phenomenon need not be left-wing
itself for it to be included in a left-wing history. Nevertheless, there
is a further implication contained in the apparent anachronism of both
terms. By inserting these essentially social terms into a profoundly
non-social, material account, Prynne seems to make a claim to be more
materialist than any existing brand of political analysis, notably
Marxism. The history of all hitherto existing society may be the history
of class struggle, but the history of all class struggle is the history
of stone and metal. Crucially, Prynne’s history is ‘exilic’, and thus
presumably to be differentiated from the long process of collective
solidarity and struggle that more commonly goes under the name
‘left-wing’. In fact, the term ‘exilic’ specifically recalls his
contemporaneous quotation to Riley of Shelley’s description of the
‘great sandy desert of politics’, across which Prynne suggests they
should journey as ‘honourable Beduins’.[^292] The real question, then,
consists of two parts: (a) what does Prynne understand an ‘exilic
(left-wing) history of substance’ actually to be? and, (b) is ‘A Note on
Metal’ an attempt to write, or at least to begin to write, this history?

Blanton provides a lucid response to the first part of this question in
the course of a summary of Prynne’s argument:

> \singlespacing With the advent of metal, significance no longer
> resides strictly in objects, and substance accordingly begins to
> forget its own terrestrial origins. \[…\] The qualitative hegemony of
> metal, however, does not fully eclipse the substantiality of stone,
> but rather complicates and even sublates it. Indeed the power of
> economy relies on its capacity to preserve substance as a sedimented
> concept or ground, as a sort of historical unconscious against or
> across which power implicitly measures itself. \[…\] The attempt to
> remember a writing older than monetary circulation or the commodity
> \[…\] offers an Archimedean critical point outside of economy, a
> position from which to induce, perform, or merely conceive modernity’s
> end.[^293]

\noindent Following John-Joseph Goux, Blanton argues that ‘the gesture
to an origin of economics or an origin of capital fatally undermines the
hegemonic notion of the symbol’—a left-wing history of substance
consists precisely in the performance of this gesture.[^294] But is this
performance actually undertaken by Prynne in ‘A Note on Metal’, or does
he merely gesture towards a gesture? On this point, Blanton is
equivocal, describing ‘poetry’—particularly Prynne’s—as ‘an index to the
history of substance’, but neglecting to state explicitly whether or not
‘A Note on Metal’ is a member of this category.[^295] It is certainly
true, and was pointed out at the beginning of this discussion, that the
text is included in a book titled *Poems*, a status afforded to none of
Prynne’s other prose works except the fictional ‘*Plant Time Manifold*
Transcripts’ which follow *Wound Response*. On the other hand, it would
be premature to assume, as Chaganti seems to, that the simple fact of
being published in this book makes ‘A Note on Metal’ a ‘prose
poem’—taken to its logical extreme, this line of reasoning would assign
a similar status to the author’s note or the index of first lines.[^296]

This dilemma can be avoided entirely by denying, or at least modifying,
the premise of Blanton’s argument: that a left-wing history of substance
is to be found only in poetry. In fact, ‘A Note on Metal’ does not
contain a single reference to poetry. Blanton’s claim appears to rest on
the fact that Prynne is, by common consent, a poet, and that he must
therefore be committed to this form above all else. Yet it might be
countered that he is many other things, among them a teacher and a
writer of prose. It is true that ‘A Note on Metal’ was first published
in a context in which most of the prose was focused, explicitly or
otherwise, on the question of what sort of poetry English poets should
be producing in the mid-to-late 1960s—certainly this was the implicit
focus of Riley’s ‘Working Notes on British Prehistory’, to which Prynne
was, in part, responding.[^297] Nor is it necessary to deny that
Prynne’s conception of the role of poetry is an unusually far-reaching
and ambitious one. The point is simply that to restrict the notion of an
‘exilic (left-wing) history of substance’ to what is conventionally
deemed poetry is both unjustifiable based on the text of ‘A Note on
Metal’ itself and implicitly contradicted by Prynne’s own comments to
Riley on the role of prose, as discussed earlier in this chapter.

‘A Note on Metal’ accords fundamental importance to history, both as a
word and as a concept. The text is, self-evidently, a work of history
itself, though this may not be its only function. It also *seeks* a
history, the ‘exilic (left-wing) history of substance’ referred to
above. Importantly, Prynne deliberately counterposes the concepts of
*history* and *theory*, most obviously at the end of the third
paragraph, where ‘the history of substance (stone) shifts with complex
social implication into the theory of power (metal)’ (¶3), but also in
the reference to the ‘“purer” and more abstract theory of value’ (¶5)
brought into being by threshing. A theory is, in a basic sense, the
forward- or present-facing counterpart of a history: a descriptive
structure which attempts to account for a phenomenon while remaining
open to potential falsification. For Prynne it seems to be coded
negatively, signifying the increasing abstraction which it is the main
purpose of ‘A Note on Metal’ to chart, a position which would restrict
the text to something like the simple backwards/forwards schema put
forward by Chris Nealon in a recent consideration of Prynne’s
career.[^298] But does history need to be backwards-facing? On one
level, it obviously does; yet ‘a history’, no matter how exilic, is also
something which underlies and moves at the same speed as the present. In
an ideal world, history and theory meet and mutually inform each other
*in* the present; in ‘A Note on Metal’, however, this correspondence is
ruptured by theories of power and value which have deliberately
forgotten their past. So, to return in a modified form to a question
asked above: is the text an attempt to excavate this history?

‘A Note on Metal’ seems to be a provisional attempt to excavate an
‘exilic (left-wing) history of substance’, but one which acknowledges
that the task of full excavation is out of reach of any one text. The
clearest point of acknowledgement can be found in the final paragraph,
in which Prynne appears to retract—or at least to qualify—much of the
foregoing argument. Having set out an eminently linear historical
narrative, he now declares that this is not enough: a real history would
not be ‘a simple decision that any one movement is towards ruin’ (¶9).
Importantly, however, Prynne does not take this opportunity to declare
the impossibility of such a history. While he acknowledges that ‘at the
unrecognised turn we are still at a loss to say where or why’ (¶9), he
refuses to hypostatise this loss as some sort of fundamental
characteristic of modernity or of the human condition in general. That
an ‘exilic (left-wing) history of substance’ is hinted at but not fully
investigated by ‘A Note on Metal’ can be seen even more clearly by
assessing the text against Prynne’s own criteria for prose, as
communicated to Riley shortly after the piece’s first publication in the
*Intelligencer*.

Discussing the passage from Shelley referred to earlier in the context
of an argument about the role of prose, Prynne claims that ‘the pathos
of Shelley’s tract, noble as it is, urgently has to be re-written for us
now, with all the hormonal sophistication of birth-control & modern
demography.’ The emphasis here is on continuity: not a crude ‘updating’
of *A Philosophical View of Reform*, but an effort to break out of
short-term political thinking through the identification of parallels
between 1820 and 1967, with the ultimate aim of laying bare deeper
historical forces. Yet this sort of ‘re-writing’ is something which ‘A
Note on Metal’ deliberately forgoes. As mentioned above, the piece’s
context implies relevance to a community of poets in late-1960s England,
but the text’s actual history stops in the ancient world. Prynne spends
eight paragraphs describing several thousand years of developments in
materials from the Stone Age to the Iron Age, but offers only the most
brief and suggestive account of how these developments relate, for
example, to currency as it exists in the mid-to-late twentieth century,
and no account at all of how modern materials such as plastics might fit
into or challenge this history.[^299] ‘A Note on Metal’ is, quite
literally, a prehistory, both in the conventional sense of dealing with
the prehistoric era, and to the extent that it constitutes a necessary
prelude to the more comprehensive re-writing that Prynne wishes to see.

v. Conclusion
-------------

In the fourth chapter of ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, Sutherland
provides a detailed account of the later stages of Prynne’s
relationship—intellectual and personal—with Charles Olson. Through a
reading of the correspondence and the later poems of *The White Stones*,
he suggests that Prynne’s response to Olson’s 1953 prose work *The Mayan
Letters*, reissued by Jonathan Cape in 1968, demonstrates a fundamental
difference between the two poets’ conceptions of history. *The Mayan
Letters* consists of letters from Olson to Robert Creeley, written
during a stay in Mexico and largely concerned with the immediate
apprehension of Mayan civilisation as a sort of pre-lapsarian state, to
which modern society might return through an act of poetic will. As is
typical for Olson, despite its historical subject matter and its
engagement with primary sources—in this case, Mayan hieroglyphs—the text
deliberately eschews all the trappings of academic history. As
Sutherland puts it, describing the pamphlet *The Special View of
History* (1970), when Olson writes about history ‘\[h\]e means nothing
about which we can speak very precisely, and this is part of what he
does mean.’[^300] Sutherland goes on to describe Prynne’s poem ‘Bronze :
Fish’, which he takes to be a direct response to *The Mayan Letters*, as
‘a poetic argument for strictness and accuracy and against Olson’s
“negative” capacity to romanticise archaic cultures in disregard of
scholarship.’[^301] His interpretation is supported by Prynne’s recent
*Paris Review* interview, in which he talks at length about Olson’s
aversion to serious scholarship, referring directly to *The Mayan
Letters*: ‘The Mayan stuff, for example. \[Olson\] had no real
understanding of how glyph languages work. It was a romantic,
liberational idea for him, but it took leave of the historical record
rather early and rather freely.’[^302]

This distinction between Prynne and Olson sheds light, through Prynne’s
attitude to history, on ‘A Note on Metal’. One of the key points that
Sutherland uses to distinguish Prynne from Olson is the former’s
emphasis on a history which persists, without fundamental breaks, from
the time of the historical object right up to the moment of composition.
Whereas ‘Olson excavates back and down into a world which is the
contrary of modernity’, Prynne remains committed to a theory of
continuity, however obscure and unrecognised. Nevertheless, Prynne’s
position is also characterised by a deep lack of certainty, an antipathy
to settled and self-satisfied pronouncements about the relationship
between past and present, especially when made in the form of vatic
utterances. This is precisely the scepticism which, as was shown above,
emerges in the final paragraph of ‘A Note on Metal’. Sutherland derives
a political content from this stance, describing it as

> \singlespacing a conscious refusal of specificity, on the grounds
> perhaps that both Pound’s and Olson’s seizure of specific cultural
> formations as the condition of unity led respectively to fascistic and
> egregious forms of mythologisation of the heroic modern individual.
> Prynne’s vagueness is thus a calculated form of resistance to
> political error, as well as a resistance to the ‘tweezers and tropic
> catalogues’ of academic forms of rationality cut off from any general
> purpose or general understanding of their place in the world.[^303]

\noindent For Sutherland, then, Prynne is both a proponent of accuracy
and an opponent of specificity, depending on the exact context of each
work. As the contours of a text like ‘A Note on Metal’ make clear,
Prynne is prepared to deploy all the resources of conventional
historical scholarship where they stand a real chance of revealing
something about our relation to the past, but he is careful to steer
clear both of pedantic scholarship-for-scholarship’s-sake and of grand
Olsonion/Poundian leaps which reject academic rigour as a matter of
myopic principle. This bears directly on the issue of a text’s
poetic/prosaic status. If, as Prynne claims in the 15 September letter
to Riley, poems must be ‘right’ and prose published in little magazines
should ‘less armour-plated’, then any prose text worth reading—including
‘A Note on Metal’—must in some sense be both poetry *and* prose. Good
prose is not that which completely dispenses with poetry’s immediate
accuracy, but that which contains a central grain of it. At the same
time, the ‘poeticising’ of the text is in this case precisely what
renders it ‘more provisional’, opening up chinks in its scholarly
armour.

Some attention was paid at the beginning of this discussion to the
distinctive philosophical vocabulary deployed by Prynne in ‘A Note on
Metal’, and particularly to the term ‘substance’. It was suggested that
this word recalls the pantheism of Spinoza and the related idealism of
Hegel, but that these perspectives are entirely incommensurable with
Prynne’s own, which emphasises the absolute exteriority and
self-sufficiency of the object, a category which includes ostensibly
human creations such as language. The key source for this attitude,
particularly the latter part, is Prynne’s 1961 text ‘Resistance and
Difficulty’, a resumé of a particular branch of the philosophy of
perception whose main strand of argument forms a dialogue with the
American philosopher John Wild’s 1959 article ‘Contemporary
Phenomenology and the Problem of Existence’.[^304] Wild’s key aim in
this article is to defend the status of what he sees as a form of
direct, unmediated knowledge: ‘The intentional act, together with its
object, is immediately self-revealing to me, and there is a clear sense
in which I have a privileged access to such intentions.’[^305] He also
attempts to set up a distinction between reality and the imagination,
taking ‘resistance’ to be a key marker of reality: ‘A real being not
only resists my overt acts and manipulations; it resists my acts of
awareness as well. It reveals only a partial phase of itself in a
perspective that constantly changes with my movements.’ An object of the
imagination, by contrast, ‘is fixed, and lacks this openness to further
points of view. Thus a piece of painted scenery does not continue to
reveal itself as I move around it, but simply disappears.’[^306]
Imaginative objects are ‘clear and distinct’, while real objects are
‘resistant’.

It is this distinction with which Prynne takes issue. He begins by
further distinguishing between ‘resistance’ and ‘difficulty’, the latter
being the ‘subjective counterpart’ of the former: ‘I experience
difficulty when I encounter resistance.’ In other words, ‘difficulty is
cognitively prior to resistance but ontologically dependent upon it.’
Importantly, ‘resistance itself comes nearer than any other
differentiable quality to being completely inherent in the
object’.[^307] He then demonstrates the ‘viciousness’ of a position like
Wild’s, which ‘allows the external world only sufficient objective
reality for the major dimensions of human living to be set up’:

> \singlespacing ‘Self-conscious action’ in the milieu described with
> such eloquence, as a primary source for the experience of existence,
> seems to point to a position where the external world’s main value to
> the subject lies in the graduated difficulties that it can provide him
> with, and by means of which the subject can render himself and his
> actions fully intelligible. I do not discover much about the nature of
> water, if I require it only in order to realise my ability to swim;
> and if the attempt to reach an awareness of substance is thus prompted
> by the need for self-definition, then we must expect the contributions
> of the imagination to be set aside.[^308]

\noindent Wild’s stance is reduced to a sort of weak (in the
intellectual sense) epistemological solipsism, albeit one which does not
yet realise quite how alone it might be. Prynne then reintroduces the
imagination, and by extension art, in a much more important role,
claiming that they

> \singlespacing offer both the difficulty of contrivance and also a
> profound assurance that this difficulty corresponds to genuine
> resistance in the larger context of the outside world. It is the
> imagination’s peculiar function to admit, draw sustenance from, and
> celebrate the ontological priority of this outside world, by creating
> entities which subsequently become a part of the world, an addition to
> it.[^309]

\noindent Art objects—and, for Prynne especially, poems—become effective
guarantors of a continued relationship between the subject and what lies
outside it, between difficulty and resistance. Whether through actually
creating new resistant material *ex nihilo* or through permanently
transforming that which already exists—Prynne is not entirely clear on
this point—art sets up the possibility of a real and logical channel
between subject and object, as opposed to a potentially deceptive cocoon
of mere difficulty.[^310]

Prynne’s concerns and mode of argument in ‘Resistance and
Difficulty’—though not his conclusions—bear a striking resemblance to
those of Quentin Meillassoux in his 2006 book *Après la finitude*,
translated into English in 2008 as *After Finitude*.[^311] In this short
work, Meillassoux takes aim at a stance which he terms ‘correlationism’,
and which he takes to be the dominant perspective in contemporary
philosophy, both continental and analytic. For the correlationist, ‘we
only ever have access to the correlation between thinking and being, and
never to either term considered apart from the other.’[^312] Meillassoux
identifies this as an explicitly post-Kantian attitude designed to avoid
the pitfalls both of pre-critical metaphysical dogmatism and of
subjective idealism. Its effect, however, is to keep the subject locked
in what he terms, after Francis Wolff, a ‘transparent cage’:

> \singlespacing correlationism readily insists upon the fact that
> consciousness, like language, enjoys an originary connection to a
> radical exteriority (exemplified by phenomenological consciousness
> transcending or as Sartre puts it ‘exploding’ towards the world); yet
> on the other hand this insistence seems to dissimulate a strange
> feeling of imprisonment or enclosure within this very exteriority
> \[…\]. Consciousness and its language certainly transcend themselves
> towards the world, but there is a world only insofar as consciousness
> transcends itself towards it.[^313]

\noindent It is not difficult to see the similarities between
Meillassoux’s description of correlationism and Prynne’s critique of
Wild, for whom ‘the external world’s main value to the subject lies in
the graduated difficulties that it can provide him with’.[^314]
Meillassoux goes on to reveal what Prynne would call the ‘viciousness’
of the correlationist view by means of a thought experiment. Proposing
an object accessible to science but which predates all human life, which
he terms ‘the arche-fossil’—examples include ‘an isotope whose rate of
radioactive decay we know, or the luminous emission of a star that
informs us as to the date of its formation’—Meillassoux shows how a
consistent correlationism is necessarily barred from making meaningful
statements about the pre-human past which such an object apparently
reveals.[^315] Despite making conventional concessions to science in
everyday discourse, the correlationist cannot finally think the origin
of the correlation, the emergence into being of givenness. The
correlationist will, claims Meillassoux, always add an implicit
‘codicil’ to statements about the arche-fossil: ‘event Y occurred x
number of years before the emergence of humans—*for humans* (or even,
*for the human scientist*).’[^316] As Prynne asks in ‘Resistance and
Difficulty’, ‘can the world—in its full and detailed substantiality—be
said to have existed *for me*, before my knowledge of it?’[^317] The
answer, for the strict correlationist, must be that the world can *only*
be said to have existed for me, and not in itself.

It is necessary, at this point, to offer a clarification not made by
Meillassoux himself, but which has important implications both for the
nature of the correlationist circle and for the status of the
arche-fossil. Meillassoux’s designation of the arche-fossil as an object
which precedes all human life is one of the most memorable aspects of
the book; nevertheless, as Graham Harman points out, the arche-fossil
‘is not an argument.’[^318] Rather, it is a provocative thought
experiment, designed to raise a problem which it will be the task of the
remaining chapters to analyse, and to raise it in the most effective and
convincing manner possible. This strategic aspect has a tendency to
bleed into the main stream of Meillassoux’s demonstrations. Thus, in a
recapitulation of his argument at the beginning of Chapter 3, he
describes how correlationism ‘institutes a certain kind of solipsism,
which could be called a “species solipsism”, or a “solipsism of the
community”, since it ratifies the impossibility of thinking any reality
that would be anterior or posterior to the community of thinking
beings.’[^319] This is certainly the implication of the arche-fossil as
Meillassoux presents it.

There is, however, no reason to believe that real correlationism would
fare any better in dealing with an arche-fossil that predated only the
present thinking subject, a situation which would lead to a more
familiar form of solipsism. Meillassoux seems to oscillate between these
two perspectives, which are really just a stronger and a weaker version
of each other. Thus, in the short paper ‘Time without Becoming’, he
describes how ‘\[a\]ppeals to intersubjectivity are of no account
\[against the arche-fossil\], since the time in question is not the time
preceding such and such an individual—this time is still social, made up
of the subjective temporality of ancestors—but a time preceding all
life, and so every human community.’[^320] However, it is clear from the
argument of *After Finitude* that a truly strong correlationism is
unable to appeal to intersubjectivity for anything more reliable than
representations anyway. In fact, Meillassoux admits in an endnote to the
first chapter that the arche-fossil anterior to all human life was
preferred to one merely antedating the subject because it avoids a
seeming ‘loophole’, through which the correlationist might argue that

> \singlespacing one’s individual birth and death occurs within a time
> which is woven from intersubjectivity—the time of the community of
> consciousnesses, which means that to be born and to die is to be born
> and to die for other consciousnesses, and hence to be deployed in a
> becoming which is once more reducible to its givenness for a community
> of egos.

\noindent Yet as Meillassoux rightly points out, ‘this rejoinder is a
desperate sophism, which reduces emergence and perishing to whatever the
other perceives of it.’[^321] For strong correlationism, ‘the other’ is
as inaccessible as the in-itself. As such, there is no essential
difference between an arche-fossil from 13.5 billion years ago (the date
given by Meillassoux for the origin of the universe), one from 1900 (the
birth date of the world’s oldest living person at the time of writing)
or one from 1990 (the present author’s own year of birth), as long as it
is anterior to the presently thinking subject.[^322]

Following the book’s provocative introduction, Meillassoux spends the
remainder of *After Finitude* in a painstaking effort to penetrate the
‘correlationist circle’ and to gain access to the ‘great outdoors’ which
lies outside contemporary philosophy’s transparent cage.[^323] Like
Prynne’s, his attempt is to some extent an ‘inside job’, accepting the
premises of his opponent before adding a new term which completely
reconfigures the situation; unlike Prynne’s, it is strictly rationalist
in character. The details of his argument, which relies largely on the
counterintuitive implications of absolute contingency, are, however, of
less interest in the present context than his reasons for making it.
Meillassoux sees the main problem with correlationism not in the theory
itself, but in what its abdication of responsibility for the absolute
makes room for: a new fideism. For the strong correlationist, reason has
no more privileged access to the absolute than does faith—any claim to
such access is equally valid. This tendency is referred to by
Meillassoux as the ‘religionizing of reason’, and he sees it as having
operated ever since the Enlightenment’s first critiques of religious
dogmatism.[^324] He demonstrates how, in the modern era, philosophers as
diverse as Wittgenstein and Heidegger have allowed fideistic elements
into their work, giving Levinas’s conception of ‘the wholly other’ as a
paradigmatic example of twentieth-century religionised reason.[^325]

Meillassoux’s opposition to fideism seems, at the very least, to be
structurally analogous to Prynne’s antipathy towards the supposedly
direct historical access represented by Olson’s *Mayan Letters*. Whereas
for Meillassoux what needs to be countered is the attitude which accords
legitimacy to protestations of faith precisely to the extent that they
disavow claims to reason, for Prynne it is a lazy position which assigns
a privileged epistemological status to the poet while evacuating the
latter term of meaning: the poet *just has* access to the essence of
Mayan civilisation, without having to do any (or having to do only
minimal) poetic work. It is clear, however, that the two situations are
not exactly the same. In fact, it is necessary at this point to
distinguish between two separate comparisons between Prynne and
Meillassoux, which are not entirely compatible. In ‘Resistance and
Difficulty’, Prynne takes aim at a philosophical position that falls
into the broad category of correlationism, with the aim, like
Meillassoux, of reopening a channel to the ‘great outdoors’ of reality;
in his comments on Olson, as described by Sutherland, he expresses
scepticism about an attitude to history comparable to what Meillassoux
characterises as fideism. Yet for Prynne these two undesirable positions
do not seem to exist in a toxic relationship of
complementarity-in-difference. It is not the case that John Wild’s
stance leaves a gap which is filled by Olson’s; or at least, if it is,
this is not the line taken by Prynne. In fact, the solution to the
problem of correlationism provided in ‘Resistance and Difficulty’ seems,
at first glance, closer to fideism than to Meillassoux’s ‘speculative
materialism’—it is certainly difficult to imagine the latter, for all
his commitment to poetry, being satisfied by such a simple move.[^326]
Equally, the predominant ‘tweezers and tropic catalogues’ approach to
history opposed by Prynne can hardly be considered a form of
correlationism, its disjunction from reality being a function of its
academic self-absorption rather than a deliberate epistemological
stance.

This clarification of Prynne’s twin positions offers a new way of
looking at his task in ‘A Note on Metal’. On the one hand, it is a text
which does real historical work based on archaeological evidence, and
which refuses to claim some sort of poetic position automatically
superior to the academic books and articles which are cited in its
endnotes. This is the level on which the text was approached in the
early stages of this reading, accepting its claim to empirical knowledge
and testing that claim against more recent evidence where necessary. On
the other hand, ‘A Note on Metal’ *is* in some sense a poetic work. The
argument for considering the text as a ‘prose poem’ based on its
publication in *Poems* was dismissed earlier as overbroad. Nevertheless,
the very fact that ‘A Note on Metal’ is so regularly confused with a
poem is itself suggestive, and means that it does differ from something
like the book’s index of first lines. The word ‘note’ in the title of
such a hugely ambitious text must be consciously ironic, but it is also
a key term for Prynne, deployed to describe other prose works—‘A
Pedantic Note in Two Parts’, *Field Notes*—as well as the poem ‘First
Notes on Daylight’, which is roughly contemporaneous with ‘A Note on
Metal’. For Prynne, the note is a form whose apparent modesty also
implies flexibility and freedom from the more teleologically determinant
aspects of academic rationality, while maintaining some of the more
useful, lower-level aspects: scholarly accuracy, concern for references,
and so on. Like reports in *Notes and Queries*, Prynne’s notes are freed
from the formal and argumentative imperatives of the full-length journal
article or the scholarly monograph; yet unlike such reports, they make
use of this freedom to head in a direction of their own. If ‘A Note on
Metal’ is to be read accurately, it must be read not only as a work of
history, but also as one of those ‘entities which subsequently become a
part of the world’ which are described in ‘Resistance and
Difficulty’—that is to say, as a poem.

The poem, for Prynne, is perhaps something like a reverse arche-fossil.
Whereas Meillassoux’s arche-fossil is an object completely external to
humanity which is nevertheless recuperable by science (it is this
recuperability which creates problems for correlationism), the poem—a
category which includes ‘A Note on Metal’—is a man-made object
characterised by its having become at least partially *un*recuperable:
once written, it is a resistant piece of the external world, whose
essence can never be entirely captured by hermeneutics. An important
consequence of this view in the present context is that the poem thereby
becomes part of history, a data point on the same ontological plane as
any other piece of historical evidence.[^327] ‘History’ is a word with
at least two meanings: it designates both the object of historical
enquiry—in the most basic sense, facts about the past—and, as ‘a
history’, the process of recovering, synthesising and recounting those
facts, i.e. the act of historical enquiry itself. ‘A Note on Metal’ is
history in both senses, and the careful and deliberate nature of its
textual construction suggests that it is aware of this status. This is
true not only of ‘A Note on Metal’ as a whole, but of each of its
constituent parts, right down to individual words. We thus return to the
phenomenon by which the text is a sort of index of itself, described
earlier as an attempt to make clear the conditions of possibility of its
own terminology. In being simultaneously a history and a poem—in other
words, resistant, requiring an effort of interpretation, not
self-effacing or aiming at transparency like a more conventional piece
of historical discourse—‘A Note on Metal’ is something different from
epic, in which the poem merely *includes* history as its object. It is
here that Prynne’s ‘exilic (left-wing) history of substance’ can be
found. Paradoxically, it is only when the text is read as history and
nothing more that this deeper history appears ‘exilic’: when it is
grasped in its full substantiality, as history *and* poem, it appears
clearly, not as the object of the text but as the substance from which
every word is formed, as well as the animating principle behind their
configuration.[^328] It is as if ‘A Note on Metal’ was an impossible
sort of coin, one side of which precludes access to its obverse, while
the other allows both to be viewed at once. What, then, does it actually
take to view the text, and history as such, from this privileged angle?

Having described Prynne’s concern for historical accuracy in
contradistinction to Olson’s great leaps, Sutherland introduces a
further, qualifying term. For the Prynne of *The White Stones*—or at
least of the majority of the poems in that collection, excluding a few
which significantly postdate ‘A Note on Metal’—accuracy can never be
completely sufficient; indeed, it must sometimes be held in check.
Referring to a prior reading of the poem ‘In Cimmerian Darkness’, as
well as Prynne’s frequent use of the trope of ‘the city’ for ‘some other
version of this | present age’, Sutherland describes how

> \singlespacing it is precisely the prerogative belonging to our real
> *auctoritas* to imagine that in the other world, “the city,” our
> accuracy would be immediate and not a matter of conscious resistance
> of error; and furthermore that we can make a true gesture toward that
> condition only by suspending the characteristically modern need to be
> accurate at the moment when the condition itself, the city, seems
> nearest to the imagination.[^329]

\noindent The temporary suspension of accuracy in this world is the
condition for accuracy in the next, which is actually just another
version of here. Yet it really is only a *condition*: unlike Olson’s
active mysticism, Prynne’s is profoundly passive, emphasising patience
and trust rather than the poet’s uniquely active and accurate
penetration of the mysteries of being. From this perspective, it is
possible to return to the unexpectedly lyrical concluding sentence of ‘A
Note on Metal’: ‘If we are confident over the more developed
consequences, at the unrecognised turn we are still at a loss to say
where or why’ (¶9). That Prynne ends the text with this affirmation of
our lack of knowledge, figured as a spatial condition—‘at a loss’—is
highly significant. Not only does he downplay our accuracy about
specifics (‘where’), but he also suggests a serious lack of coherent
teleology in the foregoing argument, at least when read simply
historically (‘why’). The purpose of this statement, far more than a
belated protestation of humility, is perhaps to effect or at least to
encourage some form of the ‘swing across into | some other version of
this | present age’, manifested in this particular case by a shift from
the historical to the poetic-as-historical levels of the text. Only with
this final acknowledgement of ignorance, both on the part of Prynne and
of the reader, does the text yield up its real meaning. \newpage

Chapter 3. ‘The idea of perfection’
===================================

i. Introduction
---------------

The preceding chapters introduced contexts for Prynne’s career through
consideration of his critical, theoretical and historical prose. It was
pointed out that Prynne is not merely a poet, though this is undoubtedly
the work for which he is most well-known, but also a critic, a teacher
and an editor, and that this variety of activities is reflected in the
various pieces of prose work that he produced between the mid 1950s and
the mid 1970s. The present chapter will see a change both in content and
in methodology, considering Prynne’s relationship to a form that—leaving
aside an arguable exception which will be considered in the fifth
section of this chapter—he has never actually practised: fiction. This
does not, however, mean that the argument will be unable to draw upon
primary texts by Prynne. While Prynne has never written—or, at least,
never published—conventional prose fiction himself, he has certainly
produced texts which comment on the fiction of others, often in great
detail. These most often take the form of private letters, either to the
subjects of the commentary or to third parties, but Prynne has also
published at least one formal review of a novel, as well as public
letters and less formal comments. Beyond assessing Prynne’s attitude to
fiction in general, this chapter will investigate a number of
similarities between prose texts that Prynne has professed to admire,
proposing a third context for his work, akin to the nexus of Leavisite
criticism and Movement poetry discussed in Chapter 1 or the avant-garde
little magazine scene explored in the first half of Chapter 2. It will
go on to draw broader conclusions about Prynne’s basic ethical and
aesthetic stance, building on the reading of ‘A Note on Metal’ offered
in the second half of that chapter. Specifically, a gap will be traced
between two styles in Prynne’s prose work—one reasoned and deliberate,
the other vitriolic and dismissive—which will then be reconnected
through their shared advocacy of a number of implicitly aesthetic
qualities, most notably sexual maturity.

The list of novelists mentioned by Prynne in his letters of the 1960s
and ’70s is long, but not perhaps as long as might be expected;
certainly, it is dwarfed by the number of poets mentioned. This
manageability makes it relatively easy to identify authors who appear
more than once, or with whom Prynne corresponded directly, suggesting
that he was particularly interested in their work. This restricted list
may be divided into three main categories: Prynne’s avant-garde
contemporaries in Britain (Tony Ward, Douglas Oliver); American writers
associated loosely with the Black Mountain group (Ed Dorn, Douglas
Woolf); and older figures with whom Prynne is unlikely to have had any
direct personal connection (Wyndham Lewis, Edward Upward). In-keeping
with this thesis’s focus on British contexts for Prynne’s work, this
chapter will concentrate on the first and the third of these groups,
leaving aside Tony Ward, whose novels are generally only mentioned by
Prynne in passing, or in conversations about the practicalities of
publication.[^330] The relationship between the three remaining
names—Wyndham Lewis, Douglas Oliver and Edward Upward—is, it will be
argued, roughly triangular, in the sense that there are a number of
strong similarities between Lewis and Upward, Upward and Oliver, and
Oliver and Lewis, but only weaker ones between all three figures at
once. In some cases, the relationship is one of direct influence: Upward
has stated explicitly, albeit with prompting, that ‘Wyndham Lewis \[…\]
influenced me considerably’, and a very specific connection will be made
between sections of Upward’s and Oliver’s work.[^331] In others, the
link rests more on the shared use of certain literary techniques.
Through an examination of Prynne’s recorded comments on each author, the
initial sections of this chapter will attempt to clarify both this
structure and the relationship between Prynne and prose fiction to which
it corresponds.

ii. Wyndham Lewis
-----------------

Prynne’s most significant comments on Wyndham Lewis come at an important
stage in his correspondence with Peter Riley, shortly before the
extended remarks on prose which were discussed in Chapter 2. Writing to
Riley on 23 June 1967, Prynne expresses exasperation with the latest
issue of *The English Intelligencer*, which he has been helping to
produce. Its ‘effect’, he claims, ‘is of a somewhat parochial and
*second-hand* youthfulness: most of the tedious embarrassments of youth
without any of the original energy of (a) not having read anything
except the great classics of the past, or (b) of having read with profit
& intelligent insight the writing of the present.’[^332] The
*Intelligencer* poets are, according to Prynne, doubly vapid, completely
disengaged from literary tradition: ‘There is really no option about
it:- either a man like \[David\] Grubb must read Milton & Pound, or he
must prove that he doesn’t need to. Otherwise, the level of childishness
is just too high altogether.’ Having blasted Grubb, Prynne moves on to a
long-running conversation in the pages of the *Intelligencer* about
poetic language and historical experience, a conversation to which ‘A
Note on Metal’ had been a significant contribution. He describes either
the latest public interventions in this debate—made by Tim Longville,
David Chaloner, Jim Philip and Riley himself—or the contents of a
previous letter from Riley, as ‘arguments about syllabic and epistemic
nicety, that we touch with equal conscience on the fall of speech and
the localities of our experience’. Prynne goes on to declare that ‘this
is surely an ethic which we can now simply presume’:

> \singlespacing That subject-object dialectic is just part of our
> remorse at consorting so intimately with language quite as much as
> with the natural aspect. & it’s part of our history too, & I would
> hold myself that we can best regard the problem in that form as
> *superseded*, i.e. we have moved on from that apparent impasse, the
> syntax & phenomenology of *regard* (in both senses, including regard
> *for*) is a French and American pre-occupation which charmingly
> attests their respective old-fashionedness.

\noindent The absence of Riley’s side of the correspondence clouds our
understanding of Prynne’s argument here. Nevertheless, what he seems to
be saying is that the mutually constitutive nature of language and
experience is a phenomenon which, by 1967, is no longer an interesting
or profitable subject of discussion, at least in its basic form. The
‘subject-object dialectic’ which lies behind arguments about poets’
relation to history, in particular, is, Prynne suggests, merely a
symptomatic outgrowth of the use of language itself—and this is
something which poets should by now be able to assume.

Prynne’s argument may be clarified through reference to a previous
letter, dated roughly one month earlier. Here, Prynne rails against what
he terms (‘with crisp French melodrama’) ‘*the public exclusion of
freedom*’.[^333] He is referring to emerging structuralist modes of
analysis—notably the anthropology of Claude Lévi-Strauss—which,
according to Prynne, promote the ‘idea that originary history defined
the world by limiting the choice of language (and conduct) within it’.
Later, he states explicitly that ‘Lévi-Strauss \[…\] synchronises our
use of the past into types and thus settles a wire-mesh of structural
probabilities around our prospect of the future.’ The language of
restriction here is very similar to Francis Wolff’s invocation of the
‘transparent cage’, as quoted by Meillassoux, and though it refers to
the structure of language rather than strictly to the correlationist
circle, Prynne can be seen to tack closer to the latter in his
denunciation of the ‘subject-object dialectic’ above.[^334] As in
Chapter 2, while starting from a problematic which is similar in
structure—and certainly similarly felt and expressed—Prynne diverges
wildly from Meillassoux in his prescriptions, ignoring ‘some generative
idea of contingency’ in favour of a ‘tactic of *refusal* \[which\] is
part Romantic/Anarchist’. Importantly, this abrupt and practically
unargued defence of free choice—history being ‘the language by which we
implicate ourselves \[…\] into a *chosen* diffidence about the
future’—is linked directly to fiction: ‘the past at any point cannot be
a new kind of present unless it’s taken up through narrative, fictive
and not polemic’. This would seem directly to contradict the attitude
expressed in contemporary letters to Riley, notably that of 15 September
1967 which was discussed in the conclusion to Chapter 2. There, though
he does not use the word ‘polemic’, Prynne appeals explicitly to
‘*opinion*’ and ‘the inter-modifying force of open *argument*’,
advocating a rewriting of Shelley which cannot be anything but
polemical. Unless the opinions expressed in Prynne’s correspondence are
to be considered wildly inconsistent, then, his comments in May must be
taken to refer to a different type or level of prose than his comments
in September. Polemic is what is needed temporarily to kick-start the
*Intelligencer*, but fiction—or ‘fictive narrative’—is what is
ultimately required to make the past ‘a new kind of present’.

Prynne goes on to substantiate his designation of ‘the syntax &
phenomenology of *regard*’ as ‘a French and American pre-occupation’ by
citing Alain Robbe-Grillet and Louis Zukofsky, but without any real
explanation of what it is in these writers’ work which conforms to his
definition.[^335] What he does suggest is a connection between the
attitude described above and a pedantic, ‘musical’ approach to poetic
language. What is wrong with Zukofsky—who is described, confusingly, as
‘an old granny who’s never got beyond an essentially adolescent ethic of
scruple’—is his concern with ‘microrhetoric’ and ‘musical analogisings’,
his treatment of language as ‘an old & delicate musical box \[which\]
scatter\[s\] on the page \[…\] charming inanities’. This retreat into
music is, for the anti-Paterian Prynne, a fatally unambitious reaction
to ‘our remorse at consorting so intimately with language’, a strikingly
sexual phrase by which he seems to mean paying attention to the
conventionally semiotic aspects of language.[^336] It is certainly not,
as Peter Riley seems to suggest in the *Intelligencer*, some sort of
shortcut to ‘the entire vital structure’ of historical human
experience.[^337] It is at this point that Prynne brings up Lewis.
Despairing of writers who treat ‘life in the world’ as ‘a china-shop’,
he notes that ‘\[i\]t’s as if, for example, Wyndham Lewis had never
written a line, as if *Blast* now has to be done all over again. That’s
of course why *Tarr* has been allowed to go out of print’. The
implication here is not only of a regrettable tendency in contemporary
literature but of a positive conspiracy against anything that might
counter it, inattention to Lewis’s 1918 novel *Tarr* being a case in
point.[^338] Prynne goes on to quote a paragraph from the book:

> \singlespacing ‘Small as it is, I shan’t get it’ he thought and began
> repeating this stupidly and stuck at the word ‘shan’t.’ Brain and
> mouth in a sluggish tangle, he stuttered thickly in his mind. He
> sprang up a blustering dishevelled mass, but the slovenly hopeless
> quality of the bed clung to him. This was a frivolous demonstration.
> He wandered to the window in a sulky apathy, his nose flattened
> against the pane, conscious of his compressed putty-grey mask, he let
> his gaze stream out into space.[^339]

\noindent The assessment of this passage is as absolute as it is opaque,
recapitulating Prynne’s conspiratorial theme: ‘The sheer satiric
intelligence of this disposes finally of the claim that our best
accuracies are musical in structure. Which of course was its intention;
hence the current neglect.’ It is unclear from Prynne’s letter how this
quotation from *Tarr* is supposed to relate to the issues which he has
been discussing. In his play with dialogue, Lewis is certainly concerned
with ‘the fall of speech’—indeed, his construction of the sibilant
sentence ‘Small as it is, I shan’t get it’ and his description of the
character Otto Kreisler’s looping, stuttering engagement with this
particular piece of language might be described as ‘microrhetoric’. Is
Prynne’s point, then, that a concern with the ‘musicality’ of language
in the 1960s is outdated because it has already been done by Lewis in
the 1910s, or because it has already been *satirised*? The idea that
Lewis’s text ‘disposes finally of the claim that our best accuracies are
musical in structure’ would seem to suggest the latter: Kreisler is like
a stupid writer, obsessed with the sound of language but unable even to
produce a simple alliterative mantra without getting ‘tangle\[d\]’ in
his own words. To take another approach, does Prynne mean to suggest
that the focus on Kreisler’s gaze in the final sentence represents some
sort of satirical attack on what he terms ‘the syntax & phenomenology of
regard’? Having attended Henri Bergson’s lectures in Paris, Lewis was
certainly familiar with contemporary philosophies of perception, but the
relative infancy of Husserlian phenomenology at this point—though first
published as a whole in 1918, the initial draft of *Tarr* was written
from 1909–11—sets a high burden of proof on any claim about deliberate
engagement, satirical or otherwise.[^340]

A different perspective can be gained by ‘zooming out’ from this
particular passage to consider the general cultural significance of
*Tarr* and its author, particularly in light of Prynne’s pejorative
reference to ‘French and American pre-occupation\[s\]’. Following an
Englishman’s interactions with a series of Germans, Russians and Poles
in Paris, *Tarr* is a novel obsessed with national character: as a
subject, it drives not only the book’s comic incidents, but also major
aspects of its plot. This is a fact acknowledged by Lewis himself in the
preface to the 1918 American edition, where—describing the novel’s
German co-protagonist, Kreisler—he assures readers that ‘I have not
produced this disagreeable German for the gratification of primitive
partisanship aroused by the war. On the other hand, having had him up my
sleeve for so long, I let him out at this moment in the undisguised
belief that he is very apposite.’[^341] Yet while characters such as
Kreisler are subject to an extreme form of national ridicule, the same
is not quite the case for the novel’s protagonist, Frederick Tarr. While
some play is made of Tarr’s nationality, the majority of Lewis’s
satirical jibes against Englishness are directed at comparatively minor
characters such as Hobson and Butcher, who appear in the first two
chapters of the novel. This relative freedom from national stereotyping
allows Tarr to become what Lewis describes as ‘the individual in the
book, and \[…\] at the same time one of the showmen of the
author.’[^342] Tarr is not primarily ‘an Englishman’—he is a man, first
and foremost, and English second. ‘For Tarr’, notes Scott W. Klein,
‘individuals without a robust sense of self become merely predictable
products of their national upbringing, an assemblage of the tics and
prejudices of their national ethos.’[^343] By contrast, Tarr is able to
navigate the cosmopolitan environment of pre-war Paris relatively
unmolested by narrative stereotyping, using his ‘sense of self’ to
expose hypocrisy in others. As Klein points out, again, ‘\[t\]he novel
balances Tarr’s nominal ability to look at life objectively, “from the
outside”, and to separate his relationship to art from his relationship
to sex, against Kreisler’s increasingly clear inability to separate art
from life and sexuality from violence’—similar structures are set up at
the expense of other characters.[^344] This is not to say that Tarr
isn’t subjected to implicit criticism and even made to look ridiculous
at points; merely that these moments are not coded nationally.

A similar trick of presentation can be found in the second text cited by
Prynne, Lewis’s short-lived but legendary little magazine *Blast*, the
foundational text of Vorticism. Here, as in *Tarr*, there is an
obtrusive focus on national character. References to nationhood begin in
the magazine’s very first text, ‘Long Live the Vortex!’, which contains
the statement that ‘great artists in England are always revolutionary,
just as in France any really fine artist had a strong traditional
vein.’[^345] England and France appear again in ‘Manifesto—I’, the
famous list of things to be ‘blasted’ and ‘blessed’, simultaneously
occupying both categories, though the blasting of England is undercut by
the parenthetical phrase ‘from politeness’, positioning it from the
outset as a modest gesture made by a nation secure enough to make such
gestures.[^346] The key reference to nationhood in the first issue of
*Blast* comes, however, in ‘Manifesto—II’, the more conventional of the
magazine’s two opening texts.[^347] This piece is concerned explicitly
and self-consciously with what it might mean to make radically new art
in England. ‘We hear from America and the Continent all sorts of
disagreeable things about England: “the unmusical, anti-artistic,
unphilosophic country”’ (II.1), writes Lewis, before reversing the
expected defence: ‘We quite agree’ (II.2).[^348] He goes on to clarify
his position:

> \singlespacing 3. Luxury, sport, the famous English ‘Humour,’ the
> thrilling ascendancy and idée fixe of Class, producing the most
> intense snobbery in the World; heavy stagnant pools of Saxon blood,
> incapable of anything but the song of a frog, in home-counties:—these
> phenomena give England a peculiar distinction in the wrong sense,
> among the nations.\
> 4. This is why England produces such good artists from time to time.\
> 5. This is also the reason why a movement towards art and imagination
> could burst up here, from this lump of compressed life, with more
> force than anywhere else.

\noindent Eager to prove that ‘there is nothing Chauvinistic or
picturesquely patriotic about our contentions’ (III.1)—despite
statements such as ‘\[t\]he Modern World is due almost entirely to
Anglo-Saxon genius’ (VI.1)—Lewis here develops a negative theory of
national character: the truly revolutionary artist can only emerge from
the most stultifying, infertile, old-fashioned environment, as the
deliberate negation *of* that environment.[^349] Like Tarr, the
vorticist painter, sculptor or poet is simultaneously English and
not-English, occupying a privileged position partially inside and
partially outside national identity—a vantage point which a Frenchman or
a German could never hope to gain, not existing in such a violently
antagonistic relation to their own culture. It is not difficult to
detect a parallel here with Prynne’s letters, which oscillate between
scathing comments on English literary culture, as in the correspondence
with Olson and Dorn discussed in Chapters 1 and 2, and comparisons which
seem implicitly to privilege aspects of the English intellectual
*milieu*, as in the dismissive reference to ‘French and American
pre-occupation\[s\]’ considered above. In order to understand more
clearly what Prynne means by this latter phrase, and by the argument in
which it appears, this chapter will now turn to a much more deliberate
and detailed consideration of a different fictional text: Douglas
Oliver’s *The Harmless Building*.

iii. Douglas Oliver
-------------------

First published as a joint venture by Andrew Crozier’s Ferry Press and
John Riley and Tim Longville’s Grosseteste Review Books in 1973, *The
Harmless Building* was reissued in revised form in the 1990 Paladin
collection *Three Variations on the Theme of Harm*. It is Douglas
Oliver’s only individually-authored prose novel. To an even greater
extent than *Tarr*, *The Harmless Building* is structured around what
Laura Steele describes as ‘a rag-tag plot’.[^350] Highly episodic, it is
held together both by thematic elements and by the relationships and
personal concerns of its three main characters: Donald (the ostensible
protagonist), Rosine and Frank. Chief among these concerns is the
kidnapping of a ‘mongol’ (in the archaic sense referring to Down’s
syndrome) baby named Uncle Aubrey, a catastrophe which is accompanied by
a serious railway accident and a hotel fire. Again like *Tarr*, *The
Harmless Building* was written during or shortly after a prolonged stay
in Paris, and shows a deep but undeferential concern with the latest
developments in European, and especially French, intellectual culture.
Chapter 12 begins with ‘seagulls circl\[ing\] overhead, calling “Jacques
Lacan, Jacques Lacan”, without giving further details.’[^351]

The parallels between Lewis’s and Oliver’s work are implicitly
acknowledged by Prynne in a 1972 letter to Oliver, which consists of an
extended response to a pre-publication version of *The Harmless
Building* and which was itself published, in amended form, in
*Grosseteste Review* the following year.[^352] Describing recent poetic
work by Crozier, John James, Tom Phillips, Oliver, and himself, Prynne
claims that ‘the Anglo team have their teeth really sunk into pain,
great physical gouts of it, as opposed to the water-colour joys of the
American art-gallery nympholepts. Your novel confirms this; its elegance
is much too vorticist for the pre-sexual phenomenology preferred in
l’Amerique du Nord.’ With the latter phrase, Prynne neatly condemns both
France and the United States, just as he does in the letter to Riley
which positions Lewis as one of the great underappreciated figures of
twentieth-century English literature. But is the statement in which it
appears any less opaque, and can it shed any light on its predecessor?

In order to parse Prynne’s argument here, it is first of all necessary
to translate his terminology. The ‘Anglo team’ is fairly clear,
referring—with a partly ironic sense of team spirit, given his more
familiar pose of vitriolic criticism—to English poets formerly
associated with *The English Intelligencer*, and now clustered around
*Grosseteste Review* and similar publications. The identity of the
‘American art-gallery nympholepts’ is less immediately obvious, but it
seems reasonable to assume that Prynne is referring to the so-called New
York School, particularly poets such as James Schuyler, Kenneth Koch and
John Ashbery, about whom he had already been thoroughly dismissive in a
1969 letter to Riley.[^353] This reading is confirmed by Prynne’s
subsequent exemption of Frank O’Hara, who, he claims, ‘had that pail of
serpents \[i.e. pain\] always in view.’ The *OED* gives the following
definitions for ‘nympholepsy’: ‘Passion supposedly inspired in men by
nymphs; an ecstasy or yearning, esp. that caused by desire for something
unattainable. Also: passion or desire aroused in men by young
girls.’[^354] Given both the broadly homosexual character of the New
York School as a group and the subsequent use of ‘pre-sexual’, it seems
appropriate to interpret Prynne’s usage in the former sense, with its
emphasis on abstract unattainability. To summarise in adjectival form,
then, Prynne counterposes the following:[^355]

  *English*   *French/American*
  ----------- -------------------
  painful     water-colour
  elegant     nympholeptic
  vorticist   pre-sexual

\noindent The essential component of this structure seems to be
something like an opposition between seriousness and frivolousness,
coded in the language of sexual development. If the phenomenology
preferred in ‘l’Amerique du Nord’ is ‘pre-sexual’, then that which we
find in *The Harmless Building* is sexual—or, to put it more simply,
adult. These terms recall Prynne’s description of Zukofsky as
‘adolescent’ and his reference to David Grubb’s ‘parochial and
*second-hand* youthfulness’ in the letter to Riley, the implication
being that certain techniques and concerns are inappropriate to a writer
working in a mature tradition.[^356] Oliver and Prynne are poets willing
to engage with the serious, grown-up subject of pain, and to do so with
a sharp, clean elegance derived partly from Vorticism; Ashbery and
others are content to wallow in a state of insubstantial, water-colour
yearning.

Before examining this sexualised approach to culture in relation to
Edward Upward, it will be helpful to consider some of Prynne’s other
comments on *The Harmless Building* in the 1972 *Grosseteste Review*
letter. Prynne’s interest in the novel appears at first to be primarily
structural. Having described the book in terms which emphasise its
coherence and solidity—‘closely cross-woven and under control’, ‘all the
tendons under multiple stress’—he describes his personal assumptions
when reading it: ‘I started with a Cartesian mind-body manifold,
extended into a continuous 3-space along the
memory/intuition/expectation timeline; this produced a three-dimensional
endocrine hypersurface forming the world tube of the “novel”.’[^357]
Assuming that ‘manifold’ is used in the mathematical rather than the
mechanical/biological sense—an assumption justified by the close
proximity of allied terms such as ‘3-space’ and ‘hypersurface’—what
Prynne seems to be suggesting here is that any point in *The Harmless
Building* can be specified using co-ordinates on the three axes *mind*,
*body* and *time* (the latter divided into
‘memory/intuition/expectation’). The clearest example of a manifold is
the Earth, a shape which resembles Euclidean space at any given point
but which requires more than one two-dimensional chart to project in
full. In Prynne’s example, latitude and longitude are apparently
replaced by mind and body, before the whole shape is extruded along the
axis of time, creating a tubular structure. It is not clear why Prynne
uses the term ‘hypersurface’, which refers to a surface with one fewer
dimensions than the space in which it exists (e.g. a one-dimensional
point on a two-dimensional plane, or a two-dimensional plane in a
three-dimensional space)—it may simply be a terminological mistake. More
interesting is the word ‘endocrine’, which re-emphasises the bodily
nature of the structure: different points in the novel are linked to
each other in an arrangement analogous to the body’s endocrine system,
in which glands transfer information via hormones secreted into the
blood.

Having set out this complex model, Prynne proceeds to complicate it
further by dividing the novel into three sections: a central *récit*
surrounded by *texte*, with a section of *hors-texte* at the very end.
Despite being rendered in French, this terminology does not seem to
correspond to any established structuralist or narratological
framework—it is worth remembering that a seminal text like Gérard
Genette’s *Discours du récit* was only published in French in 1972, the
same year in which Prynne wrote the letter. Nevertheless, it may be
understood as a partly logical, partly chronological system of
subordination: the *récit* consists of past events which are narrated
inside the (present) *texte*, with the *hors-texte* being a short
section in which the author directly addresses his readers, ‘asking all
of you who have read my book this far to send a donation of some kind to
\[learning disability charity\] Mencap’.[^358] Yet even this structure
is, finally, undermined by Prynne, who acknowledges that ‘of course that
would just (“just”) be a French roman. What you have done is quite
beyond that in saturnine tenderness, a novel deeply curled in around the
experience of good.’

Prynne’s comments on Oliver’s work, along with the negative terms
against which he defines its aesthetic achievement, helpfully illuminate
his intellectual relationship with Lewis. Literary history is never a
zero-sum game; nevertheless, Prynne’s selection of Lewis as his favoured
‘man of 1914’ is bound to have negative as well as positive
implications, the more so given the note of conspiracy with which it is
made: if Lewis has been unfairly neglected, who has been stealing the
limelight? The obvious culprit is James Joyce. In many ways, Prynne’s
praise of *The Harmless Building* corresponds in an inverted fashion to
Lewis’s attempted demolition of Joyce—his sometime friend but long-term
artistic rival—in the 1926 essay ‘The Revolutionary Simpleton’, later
reprinted as part of *Time and Western Man* (1927). Lewis uses Joyce as
an exemplar in fiction of the ‘time-cult’ which it is the main purpose
of *Time and Western Man* to counter, and deploys a wide and sometimes
contradictory range of arguments to make his point. He begins with a
straightforward denial of Joyce’s intellectual capacity, presenting him
as an unwitting vehicle for the ‘time-machinery’ derived from Bergson:
‘there is not very much reflection going on at any time inside the head
of Mr. James Joyce. That is indeed the characteristic condition of *the
craftsman*, pure and simple. \[… H\]e is not so much an inventive
intelligence as an executant.’[^359] Joyce’s work, for Lewis, is fatally
concerned with style—an odd contention for a writer whose own fiction is
now primarily read for its stylistic innovations, but one which Lewis
pursues doggedly.[^360] Joyce might indeed be described as the exemplar
*par excellence* of what Prynne disparages as ‘microrhetoric’: a concern
for language’s musicality over its meaning.

On a more fundamental level, Joyce’s work—and particularly *Ulysses*—is
criticised for its reliance on time as a structuring principle, as
against Lewis’s preferred metaphor, space. In a 1963 letter to Olson,
Prynne shows his clear appreciation of this view, quoting at length from
*Time and Western Man* and linking its prescriptions to Ezra Pound’s
approach in the *Cantos*. Prynne refers specifically to ‘Bergson’s
musicalised world’, describing the process of successful poetic creation
as a deliberate neutralisation of time: ‘time is a governing absolute
within the process, the immersal in the poem and its coming to be; but
the achieved kinetics of the thing on the page are tensions, which is
the idiom of poem as construct or diagram rather than passage or
transit.’[^361] Assuming something similar may be said to operate in the
composition of novels, Prynne’s description of *The Harmless Building*
as a ‘3-space’ becomes clearer: while this structure includes time as
one of its axes, it is a time which has become essentially spatialised,
made into just one part of a broader system which is susceptible to
diagrammatic representation.[^362]

For Lewis, visual art was to be a key model for literature’s adoption of
space. While Prynne does not compare Oliver’s work directly to painting
or sculpture, his use of ‘water-colour’ as a dismissive epithet suggests
a similar attitude, watercolour painting being in the popular
imagination a weak or feminine version of the ‘real thing’.[^363] This
structure helps to clarify what Prynne means by ‘pre-sexual’, which when
applied to poets of the New York School, as above, effectively decodes
as ‘homosexual’. Pre-sexuality for Prynne is less a necessary
developmental stage than a deliberate and contemptible immaturity,
standing in the same relation to ‘real’, mature, procreative sex as a
Victorian watercolour does to a vorticist canvas by Lewis. Rather than
being a total absence of sex, it is something more like a perversion.
Lewis’s analysis of *Ulysses*’s supposed obscenity can be seen to run
along remarkably similar lines. Discussing the progress of modernity in
general, Lewis claims that an increasingly direct cultural emphasis on
sex is paradoxically part of a project ‘to turn people’s minds away from
sex altogether eventually.’ The one aspect of life in which ‘the
otherwise popular notion of specialization of function’ is taboo, sex is
doomed to irrelevance: ‘Its expensive ecstasies and personal adornments
must go in the end. The supposed encouragement of them today is
illusory.’ Lewis uses a glancing reference to Henry Havelock Ellis and
the evidentially dubious assertion that ‘\[t\]he more clothes people
have, and the colder the climate, the more “immoral” they become’ to
prop up a claim in the opposite direction: ‘attracted by the lure of the
“immoral”, everybody in the end will be induced to become more moral,
simply-clothed, well-behaved and inexpensive.’[^364] *Ulysses* is no
more than a pawn in this drive towards titillation and illusory
immorality: ‘Once you admit the licence that, at the start, Joyce set
out to profit by, it is surprising how very little “sex” matter there is
in his pages.’ Importantly, Lewis connects the book implicitly both to
homosexuality and to immaturity by invoking the public school: ‘What is
there is largely either freudian \[*sic*\] echoes (they had to enter
into it), or else it is horse-play of a schoolboy or public-house
order.’[^365] Like John Ashbery or his English followers, Joyce’s
concern with sexuality is essentially silly, and certainly not worth
serious critical attention (aside, of course, from Lewis’s own).

Lewis is not the only literary-philosophical reference point used to
describe Oliver’s work. Oliver’s achievement in *The Harmless Building*
is, according to Prynne, to combine the technical sophistication of
French theory with something profoundly other: ‘The trust usually asked
of us \[in reading\] is textual, or “human” like a friendly dog. But
both together is so absolutely delicate and fine, I cannot say how
deeply affected I am by having read this book.’ He attempts to explain
what he means through a passing reference to Iris Murdoch: ‘it is the
risk throughout which I find profoundly moving. Going right through to
where the heart would be if the reader could afford that golden
idea-rhyme; I think of Iris Murdoch’s paper on “The Idea of Perfection”
in her new book *The Sovereignty of Good*.’ In this paper, first
published in *The Yale Review* in 1964, Murdoch attempts to counter a
‘behaviourist, existential, and utilitarian’ model of ethics which she
considers to be pervasive in British philosophy departments, and whose
influence she attributes to G.E. Moore, though her immediate target is
her former Oxford colleague Stuart Hampshire.[^366] Central to this
attitude is the idea that we relate to the good not primarily through a
process analogous to seeing (introspectively or otherwise) but through
actions in the world. Allied to this is the rule that ‘mental concepts
must be analyzed genetically’—through back-reference from the actions
that they occasion—‘and so the inner must be thought of as parasitic on
the outer.’[^367] Applying this rule rigorously leads to a situation in
which the concept of a private decision either ceases to be relevant or
ceases to exist altogether: ‘A decision does not turn out to be \[…\] an
introspectible moment. The concept has no further inner structure; it
*is* its outer structure.’[^368]

Murdoch counters this focus on action by means of an example. M, a
mother, dislikes D, her daughter-in-law. M nevertheless behaves
perfectly, not allowing her feelings to show, and D subsequently
disappears from the scene. M continues to think about D and gradually
changes her opinion. No subsequent action on M’s part results from this
changed opinion. From the behaviourist-existentialist-utilitarian
standpoint, this state of affairs can only have meaning in a
hypothetical sense: ‘M’s vision of D has altered *means* that *if* M
were to speak her mind about D now she would say different things from
the things she would have said three years ago.’[^369] But, as Murdoch
points out, ‘\[t\]he truth of the hypothetical proposition could be
consistent with nothing in the interim having occurred in M’s mind at
all’, while in this particular case something clearly has
occurred.[^370] Murdoch spends the remainder of the paper in an attempt
to rehabilitate metaphors of vision—and particularly of attention, a
concept which she takes from Simone Weil—in moral discourse: ‘What M is
*ex hypothesi* attempting to do is not just to see D accurately but to
see her justly or lovingly. \[…\] Freedom is not the sudden jumping of
the isolated will in and out of an impersonal logical complex, it is a
function of the progressive attempt to see the object clearly.’[^371]
Crucially, she goes on to connect this ethical stance, in which
attention is compelled by ‘a kind of “necessity”’ in the object, to an
aesthetic one: ‘This is something of which saints speak and which any
artist will readily understand. The idea of a patient, loving regard,
directed upon a person, a thing, a situation, presents the will not as
unimpeded movement but as something very much more like
“obedience.”’[^372]

Returning to Prynne’s comments on *The Harmless Building*, it is now
possible to interpret his statement about ‘the risk throughout \[…
g\]oing right through to where the heart would be if the reader could
afford that golden idea-rhyme’. For Murdoch, attention to an object is
analogous to—or a superset of—loving a person. Prynne has already made
clear that he interprets *The Harmless Building* not only as a novel
about bodies, but as in some sense a body itself, held together by an
endocrine system. It is only logical that such a body would have a
heart, the organ responsible for circulating that system’s hormones,
even if only as an ‘idea-rhyme’. While the casual reader may not always
be able to ‘afford’ the level of attention that this model implies, it
is nevertheless real, and is a result of what Murdoch would call
Oliver’s ‘patient, loving regard’ for the aesthetic object. This object
can be read, through the novel’s first chapter and its dedication (‘For
Tom’) as a baby: ‘I should love to keep a mongol baby alive in my mind,
an outgoingness and kindness, a lack of coherence, an area of almost
no-harm like a clearing in the middle of harm.’[^373] Yet it can just as
easily be interpreted as a sexual partner, a reading seemingly
encouraged by Chapter 15: ‘I’m talking to you. You were Rosine all
along; you knew that. I love you.’[^374] In fact, it is not necessary to
specify a single object, providing that Oliver relates to the novel’s
series of objects in the mode of ‘necessity’ and ‘obedience’ specified
by Murdoch. ‘Attention worked out so closely does not often attain to a
condition of truth’, writes Prynne, implying that, in this case at
least, it does.[^375]

iv. Edward Upward
-----------------

In his remarks to Douglas Oliver, just as in his comments to Peter Riley
on Wyndham Lewis, Prynne makes use of age and sexual maturity as motifs
to distinguish avant-garde English writing from its French and American
equivalents. Whether describing the latter as ‘adolescent’ and
‘pre-sexual’ or as an ‘old-fashioned’ art practised by ‘old grannies’,
the implication is that its English counterpart is in the prime of life,
dealing with subjects which are appropriate to a mature tradition in
forms which are equally appropriate. This chapter will now move to
consider a more controversial case, which will test the explanatory
value of this structure. Writing to Ed Dorn on 9 September 1975, Edward
Upward’s 72nd birthday, Prynne introduces the American poet to the work
of his British namesake:

> \singlespacing I’ve just been reading Edward Upward’s *The Rotten
> Elements* (first out in 1969, now in Penguin), which might have
> frightened me if I hadn’t just before that finished off a Project of
> my own. Upward was the vanished intelligence behind the
> Auden-Isherwood group; his disgust with the opportunistic pragmatism
> of English communist party policy seems to me very strikingly
> clear-minded.[^376]

\noindent This is a relatively conventional description of Upward’s
position in British literary culture in the mid 1970s.[^377] Like
Wyndham Lewis, little more than two decades his senior, Upward has been
overshadowed by more famous friends and associates, most notably his
close friend at school and university, Christopher Isherwood. This
neglect is generally attributed to a long period of literary silence
coinciding with his membership of the British Communist Party: Upward
published no major work between the Second World War and the early
1960s, when *In the Thirties* (1962), the first volume of the trilogy
which includes *The Rotten Elements*, was printed.[^378] Shoring up this
characterisation, the semi-autobiographical trilogy—published in full as
*The Spiral Ascent* in 1977—takes the conflict between its protagonist’s
political commitments and his literary ambitions as its central theme.
*In the Thirties* describes how a young, middle-class teacher and poet,
Alan Sebrill, joins the Party after a period of creative despair.
Sebrill struggles at length to reconcile the three competing demands of
political work, ‘the poetic life’ and his day job, while becoming
increasingly disenchanted with what he sees as a drift away from
orthodox Leninism by the Party leadership following the war. His
attempts to counter this tendency lead to his expulsion, along with his
wife, an event which forms the pivotal moment of *The Rotten
Elements*.[^379] In the final volume, *No Home But the Struggle*, a
retired Sebrill reflects simultaneously on his childhood and on his
current involvement with the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND).
Towards the end of the novel, he finally reaches a state of
reconciliation between poetry and politics, and the book ends
self-referentially with Upward’s stand-in having completed his own great
work, ‘the poem which I have been working on for six years and have
written the final lines of today’.[^380]

Describing *The Rotten Elements*, Prynne once again makes use of the
term ‘pre-sexual’: ‘I’m glad I can see well past \[Upward’s\] political
dilemma for the poet, but I’m glad I can see what the dilemma is,
without the paranoid pre-sexual infantilism which was the hall-mark of
the late 1960’s (itself a legacy of naively self-defensive mythologies
from the past).’ There are two possible meanings here, generated by the
ambiguity of the clause beginning ‘without’: either Upward’s novel is an
example of the ‘paranoid pre-sexual infantilism’ that Prynne describes,
but the younger writer is able to ‘see past’ it; or he is enabled to
‘see past’ it precisely because Upward’s novel dispenses with it.
Prynne’s description of the tendency as the ‘the hall-mark of the late
1960’s’, along with the novel’s publication date of 1969, would seem to
lend weight to the former reading, but his positive assessment of *The
Rotten Elements* in the preceding sentence casts doubt on this
interpretation. The book certainly does not conform to the rough
equation of ‘pre-sexual’ with sexual frivolity outlined in relation to
Joyce and the New York School above. The closest approach to these
issues in *The Rotten Elements* is a post-coital conversation between
Alan Sebrill and his wife, Elsie, concerning the relation between their
political and sexual commitments, conducted in Upward’s
characteristically stilted dialogue. Here, Sebrill’s ‘hankering after’
something other than monogamy is strictly and consensually subordinated
to politics:

> \singlespacing ‘How wrong the romantics were in their idea that for
> every person there exists somewhere a unique soul-mate.’\
> ‘Yes, and in practice it’s an idea that doesn’t go at all well with
> monogamy.’\
> ‘Perhaps under full communism there will be a return to group
> marriage. Engels seems almost to favour that.’\
> ‘I suspect it rather appeals to you too.’\
> ‘I confess I do have a sentimental hankering after it, because it
> would be so much fairer to everyone, especially to the less attractive
> ones. And it might bring back a kind of matriarchy on a higher level,
> which would compensate women for their biological disadvantages.’\
> ‘You always were a loyal feminist, dear.’\
> ‘But at present monogamy seems best.’ He put his arm gently around
> her. She said: ‘To be perpetually looking for new sex-partners must be
> such a drain on energy when there’s so much else to do.’[^381]

\noindent Divorced from its context, this passage risks taking on an
ironic tone which it does not possess in the original narrative, where a
line like ‘You always were a loyal feminist, dear’ is actually
representative of the way Upward’s characters speak. Taken at face
value, then, the message is one of seemingly justified scepticism about
the role of sexual experimentation in revolutionary practice—while it
may have its place in a communist future, Alan and Elsie seem to agree,
it is not properly part of the preparations for that future. While
desire is sensibly acknowledged in the form of Sebrill’s ‘sentimental
hankering’, it is quickly repressed, not (supposedly) by bourgeois
sexual morality, but by reason: even the utopian description of sexual
relations under ‘full communism’ is conducted in logical terms, its
arrangement justified as a system of eminently sensible ‘compensations’.
This acceptance of reproductive monogamy through a sort of sexual
pragmatism conforms almost exactly to Prynne’s concern for the adult and
mature, as opposed to the nympholeptic and pre-sexual, that has already
been described.[^382]

One month prior to the letter to Dorn mentioned above, Prynne sent a
copy of Upward’s short story ‘Sunday’ to the poet Barry MacSweeney,
along with a single sheet of paper reading ‘\[w\]ith the ivory tower
keeper’s compliments’.[^383] Written as far back as 1931, this story was
first published in Michael Roberts’s celebrated *New Country* anthology
in 1933; in Upward’s own words, it follows ‘an office-worker who dreads
returning to work on Monday. His thoughts begin on a neurotic and
self-centred note, and end with his decision to contact the workers’
movement, in other words, the local Communist Party, and to devote
himself to a cause outside himself.’[^384] The publication history,
however, is more relevant than the story’s content. Having appeared in
Roberts’s anthology, it was not printed again until 1969, when Heinemann
published *The Railway Accident and Other Stories*, a retrospective of
Upward’s early work intended to accompany *The Rotten Elements*; both
volumes were reissued as Penguin paperbacks in 1972. Given the proximity
of Prynne’s two letters, it seems likely that he read both *The Rotten
Elements* and *The Railway Accident* at roughly the same time, a few
years after his comments on *The Harmless Building*. (That Prynne was
still heavily invested in Oliver’s work by this point is confirmed by
correspondence throughout 1974, as well as by a mention of Oliver
directly after the passage on Upward in his letter to Dorn.[^385]) Any
similarities between the two writers will therefore be of particular
significance, especially in light of the terminological recurrence
considered above. In fact, there is a very specific similarity—in all
probability an instance of direct influence—between the titular story of
Upward’s 1969 collection and *The Harmless Building*.

As undergraduates at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, Upward and
Isherwood collaborated in the creation of a complex and largely private
fantasy world. Stemming from a series of in-jokes about shared
acquaintances and the university environment, this project—described by
Katherine Bucknell as ‘an elaborate imaginative game’—eventually took
shape as a fictional village, Mortmere, peopled by a shifting cast of
variously sinister and bizarre characters.[^386] ‘The Railway Accident’
is the most accomplished story to emerge from this long-running ‘game’;
as Isherwood describes it in an introduction printed in *New Directions*
11, ‘it is the last and longest of the Mortmere stories—a farewell to
Mortmere, which left Chalmers \[Upward’s pseudonym\] free to develop his
extraordinary technique in other, more fruitful directions.’[^387] The
story is narrated in a highly metaphorical, almost surrealist fashion,
which contrasts sharply with the austere prose of Upward’s later work. A
journey to Mortmere by train is interrupted by the accident of the
title; having survived, the two principal characters are ferried by car
to a party at Mortmere rectory, where recriminations over responsibility
for the crash result in a duel. It is the accident itself which seems to
be mirrored as one of the centrepieces of Oliver’s *The Harmless
Building*. The paragraphs which describe the exact moments of the
respective accidents are quoted sequentially below, Oliver following
Upward:

> \singlespacing An iron echo approached us. Clambering the lower rocks
> I turned. The express had taken the points. Booster-fitted,
> excessively rolling, the racing Mogul engine rounded the curve,
> bounded into the rear of the carriage we had left. Coaches mounted
> like viciously copulating bulls, telescoped like ventilator hatches.
> Nostril gaps in a tunnel clogged with wreckage instantly flamed. A
> faint jet of blood sprayed from a vacant window. Frog-sprawling bodies
> fumed in blazing reeds. The architrave of the tunnel crested with
> daffodils fell compact as hinged scenery. Tall rag-feathered birds
> with corrugated red wattles limped from holes among the rocks.[^388]

> \singlespacing Everyone got out, never minding the bad weather that
> met them, more concerned that the whole rear of the train had
> reprehensibly failed in its direction. Donald soon realized that his
> journey had simply crocked its elbow. He could dimly see the tragedy
> like a hill in his past. The two central carriages had remarkably
> telescoped, a time-juncture; they had torn each other’s metal aside in
> eagerness to come together and had reared up in excitement. The
> engine, quite unharmed, remained coupled on to the front carriage and
> was panting like a dog no longer interested in the night’s orgy.
> Donald’s famous locust gesture came upon him again, cracking his
> joints, which exuded darkness as the carriages cocked up and uttered
> that portentous wailing.[^389]

\noindent Perhaps the most obvious points of comparison here are the
twin sexual metaphors, both expressed through reference to animals:
where Upward’s carriages are ‘viciously copulating bulls’, Oliver’s
engine is a sexually sated dog. Two writers recounting similar events
might be expected to hit upon similar metaphors, yet Oliver and Upward
also deploy identical terminology: both, for instance, describe how the
carriages ‘telescoped’ on impact.

The frequency of rail accidents in Britain over the course of the
twentieth century means that any claim of direct literary influence will
have to vie with that of the real world.[^390] Nevertheless, there is a
broader similarity between Upward’s early work and *The Harmless
Building*, which—when combined with the 1969 publication date of *The
Railway Accident and Other Stories*—makes a direct connection more
likely. On the most basic level, Upward and Oliver share an interest in
provincial, and particularly coastal, English settings. Much of *The
Harmless Building* is set in ‘a town on the south coast of England’,
while Mortmere borders the Atlantic Ocean and Upward’s later work
maintains a fixation on the Isle of Wight.[^391] More important,
however, are the stylistic affinities between the two authors. As
mentioned above, Mortmere is an environment constructed primarily from
the eccentricities of its characters, ‘all dream-distortions of classic
English types’, whose slight deviations from expected behaviour set up
much of the village’s uncanny atmosphere.[^392] The same can be said of
the nightmarish figures who *The Harmless Building*’s main
characters—Donald, Frank and Rosine—meet in the course of the novel’s
increasingly disturbing plot: principally McFarlane, the inappropriately
upbeat and unharmed train driver; his daughter, Mary; and Jerry,
Margaret and the ‘new man’, with whom Donald ends up working at the
Tacuarembo Hotel. In fact, the hotel acts as a sort of micro-Mortmere, a
surreal and claustrophobic container for major sections of the novel’s
plot. Finally, Upward’s Mortmere stories evince the same sort of
preoccupation with the human body that can be found in Oliver’s novel.
The comparison of a railway tunnel to a nostril in the passage from ‘The
Railway Accident’ quoted above is far from being the only point at which
the body is projected on to the story’s surrounding environment: in one
memorable example, which might prove useful to a study of the latent
misogyny in much of Upward’s work, gasometers are compared to the
‘stumps of semi-amputated breasts’.[^393] Sex *per se* enjoys a liminal
status in Mortmere, and is invariably deviant: the initial draft of ‘The
Railway Accident’ contained a scene involving the rape of a choirboy,
but was expurgated prior to publication.[^394]

If *The Harmless Building* and ‘The Railway Accident’ can be said to
resemble each other, both on the level of content and stylistically, it
is also possible to make a further comparison. The intensely
metaphorical style of Lewis’s *Tarr*—which Fredric Jameson identifies
more precisely as a self-referential slippage between metaphor and
metonymy—was described above, as was its reliance on bizarre,
‘cardboard’ characters, both features deployed by Oliver and
Upward.[^395] There are other works in Lewis’s *oeuvre* which track even
more closely to this vein. Chief among these is *The Wild Body*, a
collection of short stories which was first published by Chatto & Windus
in 1927, though it was nearing its final form as early as 1919.[^396]
Prynne mentions the collection in a September 1967 letter to Riley,
claiming that it is ‘better than’ Lewis’s more famous novel *The Revenge
for Love* (1937), without providing further details.[^397] The themes
and techniques of the stories in *The Wild Body* are helpfully set out
by Lewis himself in two explanatory pieces printed towards the end of
the volume, in which he deals directly with the book’s title. Lewis’s
key aim, it seems, is to defamiliarise the body, demonstrating the
various ways in which his characters interact with and interpenetrate
their environment, rarely from a conventional perspective of unilateral,
authoritative will. In the first of his explanatory pieces, ‘Inferior
Religions’, Lewis reverses conventional conceptions of human agency,
describing his characters as ‘creaking men machines’, which are ‘worked’
by ‘some little restaurant or fishing-boat’ (the stories are set
primarily in rural Brittany and Spain).[^398] Apparently familiar human
action is made strange by the revelation of the framework of possibility
and repetition in which it takes place: ‘The wheel at Carisbrooke
imposes a set of movements upon the donkey inside it, in drawing water
from the well, that it is easy to grasp. But in the case of a hotel or
fishing-boat, for instance, the complexity of the rhythmic scheme is so
great that it passes as open and untrammelled life.[^399] In the
following piece, describing the role of humour in the stories, Lewis
quotes William James on the fundamental absurdity of the body:

> \singlespacing One need only shut oneself in a closet and begin to
> think of the fact of one’s being there, of one’s queer bodily shape in
> the darkness (a thing to make children scream at, as Stevenson says),
> of one’s fantastic character and all, to have the wonder steal over
> the detail as much as over the general fact of being, and to see that
> it is only familiarity that blunts it.’[^400]

\noindent The connection to *The Harmless Building* here is clear: just
like Lewis, Oliver shows a consistent concern with the defamiliarising,
metaphorical description of the body. To take two examples almost at
random: ‘her hips fell over to one side, settling over awkward legs like
a dollop of icecream lodged in a biased way on a double-barrelled
cornet. Only the cornet wasn’t straight. Each leg was more like a
penknife with one blade open’; ‘His body was composed of three rams’
heads on a totem pole: 1. his real face; 2. his shoulders and their long
face-torso, with nipple eyes and a “these sweets are a bit sour” navel
mouth; 3. a dwarf genital face with a long nose.’[^401]

In accordance with the roughly triangular structure identified in this
chapter’s introduction, this tendency does not map quite as clearly on
to Upward’s work, though Upward himself claims that ‘a certain
inhumaneness in the descriptions of the personal appearances of Mr
Parkin and McCreath and others in J. to the B. \[*Journey to the
Border*\] I caught from Lewis.’[^402] If Oliver is excluded, however,
there is a much stronger point of comparison to be found. As with
Mortmere, Lewis’s stories are fundamentally comic. This is made clear in
the two explanatory pieces discussed above, in which Lewis attempts to
set out a basic theory of comedy—or, more accurately, laughter. Lewis
contends, in line with his comments on ‘creaking men machines’, that
‘\[t\]he root of the Comic is to be sought in the sensations resulting
from the observations of a *thing* behaving like a person.’[^403] As
such, his characters are ‘puppets’: ‘I would present these puppets,
then, as carefully selected specimens of religious fanaticism. With
their attendant objects or fetishes they live and have a regular food
and vitality. \[…\] Their mechanism is a logical structure and they are
nothing but that.’[^404] One of the many definitions of laughter given
by Lewis is as a ‘thunderbolt’ accompanying the fleeting recognition of
oneself as just such a puppet.[^405] The characters of Mortmere appear
to conform to Lewis’s model, their interactions determined by a ‘logical
structure’ composed of diverse ‘objects and fetishes’. Upward’s and
Isherwood’s world is distinguished from Lewis’s by the tendency, as in a
warped detective story, of this logic to be simultaneously overt and
subterranean; in other words, for its form to be acknowledged, but for
its content to remain mysterious. This is pre-eminently the case in ‘The
Railway Accident’, where the accident itself (in fact a repeat of a
previous crash) is foreshadowed very early on in the story, yet none of
the characters have conventionally plausible motives for engineering it
and responsibility remains ambiguous at the story’s conclusion.
Nevertheless, the ‘thunderbolt’ that powers Mortmere is, as in Lewis,
the liminal status of the observer, who may at any time realise their
complicity in the mad world that they are attempting to describe. As
Isherwood notes, *The Railway Accident*

> \singlespacing may \[…\] be regarded as satire. But it is something
> more than that; it has an extra-dimension. It is, so to speak, a
> satire on satire, a parody of parody. Satire requires a norm, a sane
> observer, a standard of contrast. Where can we find one here? Hearn,
> the ‘I’ of the narrative, is just as crazy as the people he describes.
> Indeed, he may be crazier—for we begin to suspect that this entire
> journey and its sequel may be taking place only in his own
> imagination.[^406]

\noindent Or, in Lewis’s more ambiguous definition, ‘\[s\]atire is the
great Heaven of Ideas, where you meet the titans of red laughter; it is
just below intuition, and life charged with black illusion.’[^407]

v. ‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’
------------------------------------------

In order to examine how the complex of qualities described above—sexual
maturity, the body, satire, Vorticism, anti-French and -American
sentiment—relates to Prynne’s conception of prose fiction, and of art
more broadly, it will be necessary to consider the one text by Prynne
himself which has a reasonable claim to the form. ‘The *Plant Time
Manifold* Transcripts’ was first published in *Grosseteste Review* in
1974; it is thus roughly contemporaneous with the Penguin edition of
*The Railway Accident*, *The Harmless Building* and Prynne’s letter to
Oliver, as well as sharing a publisher with the latter two.[^408] Early
ideas for the text had been worked out in a series of letters to Ed
Dorn, which appeared in modified form as reports in *Bean News* in
1972.[^409] The *PTM* is presented for the most part as an account of a
scientific conference on the ‘Plant Time Manifold’ of its title, which
can be roughly summarised as the idea that plants’ bi-directional
vertical movement (roots downward, shoots upward) implies the need for a
new model of time. Held in London and extending from 1 April at the
latest to 3 May 1972, the conference is fictional, as are its
participants, who are given the names of plants: Professor Lichen, Dr
Cypress, Dr Gale. Nevertheless, the academic papers and books to which
these characters refer in their reported presentations are invariably
real, with scrupulous citations and easily traceable quotes. The *PTM*
thus exists in a liminal space between veracious academic discourse and
fiction, a characteristic which will be considered below.

Whereas Justin Katko, in the most detailed account to date, reads the
*PTM* on the most literal level, taking the text as one which ‘knows
itself to constitute actual scientific thinking’, this reading will pay
deliberate attention to its fictional aspects, something which scholars
of Prynne’s work have so far been reluctant to do.[^410] This is not to
contradict Katko’s explicit and strongly argued claim that the science
of the work should be taken seriously, but it is to temper his
subsequent contention that ‘any projection of irony or satire onto the
core propositions of this treatise would be detrimental to a clear-eyed
grasp of the hypothesis’.[^411] While we might well agree that any such
‘projection’ would be unwarranted, it is possible to deny that what
other critics have performed is a projection at all. Real science may be
embedded within a fictional frame, and the frame itself may be worthy of
analysis, but its position as a frame does not separate it irremediably
from that which it contains. As Katko points out, referring to one of
the original *Bean News* reports which formed the basis of the
authoritative text published in *Grosseteste Review*, ‘the satirical
frame is not locked in until the end of “Full Tilt Botany,” where we
enter the diegetic framework of the actual *PTM* conference’—in other
words, the initial stages of the text are presented more or less
transparently as Prynne’s own discourse, or at least as that of his
pseudonym, Erasmus W. Darwin.[^412] Nevertheless, the decision to expand
the frame in the compiled version, beginning the text as
reportage—‘Today’s session of the London PTM Conference’—clearly
authorises the interpretation of the whole work as fictional, if only as
one reading among others.[^413]

Perhaps the most obvious sense in which the *PTM* may be compared to the
work of Lewis, Oliver and Upward is in its use of humour. However
serious its scientific content, the *PTM* is a fundamentally comic text;
Drew Milne goes so far as to claim that it ‘contains moments of
undergraduate knockabout’.[^414] Crucially, the methods through which
this humour is generated share much with those of the writers considered
above. Prynne’s characters, for instance, are completely lacking in
depth: like Lewis’s Breton peasants in *The Wild Body*, they are
‘puppets’, shaped by their environment—in this case, the academic
conference—rather than shaping it. For the most part, figures like
Professor Quondam Lichen are relatively transparent mouthpieces for the
monophonic scientific discourse that makes up the bulk of the *PTM*.
Rather than being given verbatim, their papers are narrated in the third
person by the text’s ostensible author, a scientific journalist who,
while not strictly extradiegetic, nevertheless refrains from intervening
in any of the action. At one important point, however, the characters’
speech is reported directly. As this is the most conventionally
fictional part of the text, it will be worth considering in detail.

The section follows Lichen’s initial paper and is presented as a
transcript from a seminar attended by Lichen, Cypress and ‘a small group
of co-workers’ following ‘a prolonged lunch’.[^415] Cypress,
‘relax\[ing\] the formalities’, asks Lichen a question about ‘root
uptake of organic compounds in the, er, higher plants’, a hierarchical
term at which Lichen—not being a ‘higher plant’ himself—takes
offence.[^416] Lichen embarks on a long and increasingly ill-tempered
rant, with Cypress attempting to intervene, before ‘collaps\[ing\] into
a rosette on the desk’, having ‘during the previous (“convivial”) lunch
taken in a good deal of liquid refreshment.’[^417] Of the texts
considered above, the one which this section most closely resembles is
Upward’s ‘The Railway Accident’. Like most of Upward’s Mortmere stories,
it is dialogue-heavy, involving a rapid back-and-forth between two
characters (though unlike parts of ‘The Railway Accident’, Prynne avoids
confusion by repeating the characters’ names in the dialogue: ‘Well, Dr
Cypress’; ‘Oh indeed yes, Professor Lichen’).[^418] The characters
themselves, though nominally plants, are recognisably upper-middle class
Englishmen of exactly the sort that populate Mortmere, and as in many of
the Mortmere stories—though not ‘The Railway Accident’—their
conversation is given added momentum by the intoxication of the one of
the parties. Most importantly, the dialogue follows the
characteristically Mortmerian structure according to which a seemingly
benign surface narrative conceals an obscure and potentially violent
undercurrent. In fact, this is made clear by the narrator, for whom ‘the
incident \[…\] remains indicative of important biometric tensions
underlying this London conference.’[^419]

An even stronger resemblance can be found between this particular
section of the *PTM* and a work which falls firmly outside the nexus
represented by Lewis, Oliver and Upward, but which forms part of the
broader cultural formation analysed in Chapter 1. It would be misleading
to characterise the *PTM* solely as academic satire: while the
conference setting is important, it remains a frame for the action which
takes place within it. Even so, and despite its avant-garde credentials,
it seems clear that the *PTM* owes something to the British campus
novel, two prominent examples of which—Kingsley Amis’s *Lucky Jim*
(1954) and David Lodge’s *Changing Places* (1975)—sit roughly at either
end of this thesis’s chronological scope. The most instructive point of
comparison is Chapter 22 of Amis’s novel, which forms the comic climax
of the book. Having repeatedly steadied his nerves with whisky and
sherry, the protagonist, Jim Dixon—a member of academic staff at a
provincial university—gives a public lecture on the topic ‘merrie
England’. Just as in the *PTM*, the lecture begins relatively normally
but quickly degenerates. Where Lichen’s descent into drunkenness is
signified by orthography (‘scr-r-rupulous’, ‘Hoots mon’, ‘crowlin’
creatures’, ‘obsairved’), Dixon’s is described directly: ‘Almost
unconsciously he began to adopt an unnameable foreign accent and to read
faster and faster, his head spinning. \[…\] He began punctuating his
discourse with smothered snorts of derision. He read on, spitting out
the syllables like curses, leaving mispronunciations, omissions,
spoonerisms uncorrected’.[^420] Nevertheless, intoxication is in both
cases signified by changes in speech. Dixon does not finally collapse
like Lichen, but it is made clear that he is not far from it (‘He paused
and swayed; the heat, the drink, the nervousness, the guilt at last
joined forces in him’), and his behaviour is certainly ‘indicative of
important \[…\] tensions’—principally his fraught relationship with his
senior colleague, Professor Welch, whose voice Dixon accidentally
imitates in the course of the lecture.[^421]

Before connecting the *PTM* more directly to the work of Oliver and
Lewis, it is worth considering the academic aspect of the text in more
detail. As noted above, the conference frame is incidental to the thesis
that sits at the heart of the text, but it is not therefore arbitrary.
Prynne has spent almost his entire literary career in an academic
environment—an environment towards which he has entertained considerable
ambivalence, as the latter part of Chapter 1 sought to demonstrate. The
university and its associated institutions constitute the field of
production of virtually all of Prynne’s poetry and prose. Why, then,
does it take until 1974 for this field to become visible in the work
itself? To put it another way, what is it about the precise period in
which the *PTM* was composed that allows the academy to cross the gap
from context to content? It appears easy to dismiss this question by
referring to the *PTM*’s origins in the satirical newspaper *Bean News*,
in which Prynne’s character Erasmus W. Darwin had already been
established as a scholar, if not strictly as an academic.[^422] Yet all
this really serves to do is to the push the question back a couple of
years, from the time of the publication of the *PTM* as such in 1974 to
the beginning of Prynne’s reports for *Bean News* in 1972. An answer
seems unlikely to be found at the macro level of UK higher education
policy, either: in stark contrast to her period as Prime Minister,
Margaret Thatcher’s 1970–74 tenure as Education Secretary saw British
universities remain comparatively untouched—her written statement at the
launch of the 1972 Education White Paper spent more space on teacher
training than on the entirety of higher education.[^423] What, then, of
the micro level, that of Prynne’s individual career?

In 1972, Prynne became a University Lecturer, having previously only
held positions at his own college, Gonville and Caius. Writing to Dorn,
he emphasised that the role came with ‘something close to tenure if I
want it’.[^424] As might be expected, this appointment seems to have
entailed a considerable increase in his professional responsibilities.
Writing to Dorn again in 1975, in a notably untidy hand, Prynne gives a
powerful account of the stresses of combining academic work with
childcare:

> \singlespacing for the last 50 hours I’ve had no sleep at all. I don’t
> know how I got into this stupid spiral and I must never do it again.
> But until this bloody term is over I can do *nothing* \[…\].
> When*ever* you ring I am working with some eager creep, when I finish
> it’s never before 4 a.m., it’s a treadmill \[…\].[^425]

\noindent Married with two young children and having recently bought a
house, it is perhaps not so difficult to see why Prynne would in his
mid-to-late 30s emphasise maturity as an aesthetic criterion.
Importantly, the integration into the structures of bourgeois society
represented by these personal milestones comes at the same time as what
is arguably Prynne’s tightest professional integration into the
university. As a student and later as a research fellow at Caius,
Prynne’s poetic identity threatened to eclipse his academic one:
whatever his later assessment of *Force of Circumstance*, to have a
debut collection issued by a major national publishing house at the age
of 26 is a significant achievement. The same is obviously true of the
later stages of Prynne’s career, certainly since the publication of the
first edition of his collected poems in 1982, in which his increasing
literary fame has far outstripped any academic advancement (Prynne has
never, for instance, held the title of professor at Cambridge, though
his poetic work has led to honorary and visiting professorial
appointments at the University of Sussex and at Sun Yat-sen University
in China). The 1970s, however, represent a window between these two
stages. Not only was Prynne given an official university position in
this period, but through Caius he was on close terms—professionally if
not always personally—with some of the most important academic, and
especially scientific, figures of the period: notably Stephen Hawking,
whose *Large Scale Structure of Space-Time* was published in 1973, and
the Nobel laureate Francis Crick. The biochemist and sinologist Joseph
Needham, a close friend of Prynne’s, served as Master of the college
from 1966–76, affording him further influence. In satirising the
politics and personality clashes of contemporary academic science, then,
Prynne may well have been drawing on personal experience of a relatively
recent character. Indeed, it could easily be the case that the *PTM*’s
sophisticated engagement with modern biology and physics would not have
been possible had it been composed in a less academically diverse
environment than a Cambridge college. Some of the specific results of
this diversity will be considered in the conclusion to this chapter.

To return to the *PTM*’s fictional qualities, what is it that links the
text to the work of Oliver and Lewis, its ‘Mortmerian’ character having
already been considered? The key point of connection, which gives rise
to a number of subconnections, is the text’s concern with the body. It
was argued above that both Lewis and Oliver strive continually to
defamiliarise the human body. This is done primarily through the means
of metaphor (Lewis’s ‘creaking men-machines’, Oliver’s ice cream cornets
and penknives), with the body as tenor and some conventionally inanimate
object as vehicle. Beyond defamiliarisation, the fundamental effect here
is to remove the barrier between the body and its other: the body
becomes a simple part of the material world, just like anything else. At
times, however, this metaphorical structure breaks down into something
less rigid. This can be seen clearly in the second quotation from Oliver
given above, in which the body is said to resemble ‘three rams’ heads on
a totem-pole’. While this introduction obeys the conventional
arrangement of tenor and vehicle, what follows does not, as the body is
divided into three faces, comprising the character’s actual face, his
torso and his genitals. Comparing a face to a face is relatively
straightforward, but doing the same with a face and a torso or a face
and genitals—separate parts of the same body—is more complex. As a
metaphorical operation, it may be considered the reverse of that for
which Prynne defended Shelley in his reply to Leavis, analysed in
Chapter 1, though it is by no means less disruptive of conventional
sense-making. Rather than forgetting the tenor in a too-eager concern
for the properties of the metaphorical vehicle, Oliver sticks rigidly to
the former, seeking his vehicle in the tenor itself. This is achieved
through successive metonymic expansions (from the torso and genitals to
the body as a whole) and contractions (from the body back down to the
face). In the case of the torso-face comparison, this operation works
along a pre-existing aesthetic path laid down by such works as the
paintings in René Magritte’s *Le Viol* (‘The Rape’) series.[^426]

The metaphorical implications of the *PTM* with regard to the human body
similarly fail to conform to the simple animate/inanimate
defamiliarisation structure. In Prynne’s text, plants take the place of
humans, but this is by no means a simple process of substitution. In
fact, the *PTM* derives much of its comic force precisely from its
failure seamlessly to map tenor on to vehicle, leaving the reader in a
sort of no-man’s-land between the two. As mentioned above, the most
important clue to the text’s metaphorical structure is provided by the
characters’ names: Lichen, Cypress, ‘Myrtle’ Gale. Yet Prynne allows the
reader to take in four lengthy paragraphs of Professor Quondam Lichen’s
reported paper before his colleague, Cypress, is introduced, making it
difficult to pick up on the joke from the very beginning. Moreover, the
use of a mixed bag of species (Gale, referring to *Myrica gale*), plant
family (Cypress) and organism (Lichen) names in place of personal names
creates further confusion: are these characters to be understood as
individual plants, or as representatives of their hierarchically
distinct botanical categories? Is it significant that the character with
the highest academic honours, Lichen, represents the most conceptually
broad category, or that the only character definitely identified as a
woman represents the narrowest? What is the significance of sexual
identification at all—including, in lines such as ‘Dr G flashed a sweet
smile’, what seems like flirting—in relation to organisms which are only
rarely dioecious (having separate male and female plants)?[^427] On a
more troubling level, if the characters are to be understood as plants,
then are they experimenting on their own kind?—or is, for example,
Lichen’s work on beans intended to mirror human experimentation on other
mammals? Is the apparent lack of a clear hierarchical relationship
between scientist and subject, lichen and beans, cause for concern, or
does it in fact give the lie to human prejudices based on evolutionary
complexity?[^428] To ask such questions is not to ‘over-read’ an
essentially comic text, but rather to treat the *PTM*’s fictional frame
with the same seriousness that critics have used in analysing its
scientific content.

To understand whether or not the characters in the *PTM* have bodies in
a conventional sense, it is helpful to turn once again to the seminar
scene discussed above. Beginning at the conclusion of Lichen’s paper,
this scene includes the first significant use of verbs to describe
characters’ actions, the only previous instance being the statement in
the introductory paragraph that the paper was ‘delivered by Professor
Quondam Lichen’.[^429] The paper having been delivered, Lichen is
greeted with ‘polite, photosynthetic applause.’[^430] Immediately, plant
(photosynthesis) and human (applause) are confused, with no guidance
given on how to interpret the resulting compound, though the mention of
photosynthesis perhaps suggests plants clapping their leaves. The
narrator makes reference to a ‘prolonged lunch’ preceding the seminar,
but the characters are never described eating and drinking directly,
leaving the exact nature of their physical embodiment mysterious. In the
course of Lichen’s drunken rant, the pendulum seems to swing from human
back to plant action: defending the status of lichens as a class, the
professor describes ‘seeing trees *held up* by their Lichen canopies’, a
statement in which the capitalisation of ‘lichen’ reintroduces the
problems of naming which have already been described.[^431] Dismissing
carrots, he further alleges that ‘those crowlin’ creatures will
metabolise anything, phagocytic riff-raff’, a statement which obviously
takes its points of reference from the plant kingdom, despite humans
also being able to ‘metabolise’.[^432] Finally, Lichen’s collapse after
having ‘taken in a good deal of liquid refreshment’ is clearly meant to
recall alcoholic intoxication, yet the lack of an explicit statement to
that effect leaves open the possibility of a more plant-appropriate
explanation.[^433]

In the course of the *PTM*’s narrative sections, Prynne is clearly
concerned to blur the boundary between human and plant, refusing to
provide a one-to-one correspondence (if such a thing would even be
possible) between the actions of his characters and what they represent.
He does not simply ‘see men as trees, walking’ (Mark 8:24): the plants
in Prynne’s text think, act and speak like humans, yet what they speak
about—phagocytosis, photosynthesis—often reaffirms their status as
non-human organisms. As well as mirroring Oliver’s metaphorical
disruption of the body, this technique functions as a text-wide version
of a process conducted in a much more compressed fashion (though with a
greater proliferation of metaphorical vehicles) by Lewis. A perfect
example is given by Hugh Kenner, a description of the eponymous main
character of the story ‘Bestre’, whose body is in one paragraph compared
to a landscape, a cow, some sort of jug or cup, a liquid, genitals,
snakes and a pig. ‘We all believe \[…\] in sleek organic integrity when
the object of attention is a Man, someone “human” like our fine selves,’
writes Kenner.

> \singlespacing But this man is built up of parts, of oddly assorted
> phrases \[…\]. When we read ‘Bestre’, as we must, against something we
> carry in our heads, the uncodified but substantial tradition of
> personal description, all that novelists have learned from one another
> about ways to convey the look of people, then we may suspect a chasm
> between affrontive reality and literature’s suave procedures. Bestre
> is not so much ushered on to the page, as relentlessly looked at,
> between discharges of metaphoric shells.[^434]

\noindent The ‘tensions underlying this London conference’ might, then,
be glossed as the natural conflicts which emerge from any attempt by
living organisms to adopt an attitude of scientific observation towards
life. It is notable that Lichen’s seemingly well-intentioned defence of
the ‘lowly organisms’ against Cypress’s use of the term ‘higher plants’
quickly descends into a new form of name-calling. Following the attack
on carrots, he comes out with the ambiguously patrician/meritocratic
statement that ‘any natural fool would make a clever fellow, if he was
properly brought up’, before revealing another prejudice: ‘though for
them worm-infested tubers it’s mostly *down*, unsaturated carbon chains
of the most naive kind’.[^435] If, having followed his argument so far,
we bridle at Lichen’s denigration of tubers, why should we retain a
similarly arbitrary prejudice placing humans in ethical superiority to
plants?[^436] In this sense, the *PTM* uses the metaphorical techniques
of literary fiction—techniques similar to those used by Oliver and
Lewis—temporarily to tap into a wider constellation of early-1970s
concerns, characterised by the emerging environmental movement in
general and the controversy around plant sentience in particular.[^437]

This controversy is epitomised by Peter Tompkins and Christopher Bird’s
*The Secret Life of Plants* (1973), which appeared in the year between
Prynne’s contributions to *Bean News* and the publication of the
compiled *PTM*, though excerpts had been included in the November 1972
issue of *Harper’s Magazine*.[^438] In this engagingly written but
academically questionable work, the authors summarise the alleged
findings of a number of independent researchers into plant intelligence,
going on to discuss the implications of these results for humanity’s
interaction with the plant world. Both the researchers quoted and the
authors themselves make frequent use of concepts and terminology
associated with the New Age movement and other ‘alternative
philosophies’, and Tompkins and Bird take a stance deliberately biased
in favour of their subject, though not without the occasional hint of
irony. More interesting than the specific experimental results, or lack
thereof, is the general tenor of the book, which in its combination of
playful open-mindedness and (nominally) scientific method mirrors
Prynne’s approach in the *PTM*. It is particularly telling that in the
book’s introduction Tompkins and Bird raise the exact phenomenon which
forms the factual basis for Prynne’s plant time hypothesis:

> \singlespacing Poets and philosophers such as Johann Wolfgang von
> Goethe and Rudolf Steiner, who took the trouble to watch plants,
> discovered that they grow in opposite directions, partly burrowing
> into the ground as if attracted by gravity, partly shooting up into
> the air as if pulled by some form of antigravity, or levity.[^439]

\noindent For all Katko’s emphasis on the absolute seriousness of the
*PTM*, a tension between ‘gravity’ (the scientific hypothesis) and
‘levity’ (the comic fictional frame) makes for an apt description of the
text itself.

That Prynne, like Oliver, is aware of the specific power wielded by
partial or ambiguous metaphors—the comparison between plants and humans
in the *PTM* being a key example—can be seen by turning to a recent
prose work, *Graft and Corruption: Shakespeare’s Sonnet 15* (2015),
which also deals with the plant kingdom. Despite fitting into the
sequence of Prynne’s post-2001 commentaries on Shakespeare, Wordsworth
and George Herbert—a category which arguably also includes 2014’s
*Concepts and Conception in Poetry*, a study of Wordsworth and Wallace
Stevens—*Graft and Corruption* has origins closer to the period of this
thesis, though not strictly within it: according to a note on the text,
‘\[t\]his lecture, originally given in the Faculty of English at
Cambridge University in around the late 1970s-early 1980s, has been more
recently (2015) somewhat extended, though its main arguments have not
been altered and its references have not been updated.’[^440] Here,
Prynne offers an exemplary technical reading of Shakespeare’s poem,
drawing on extensive research into the early modern understanding of
horticultural grafting—the artificial attachment of a fresh shoot or
‘scion’ from one plant to the ‘stock’ of another—to provide a new
interpretation of the sonnet’s final two lines, ‘And all in war with
Time for loue of you | As he takes from you, I ingraft you new.’[^441]
Beginning with a discussion of the soul, Prynne notes that ‘the
apparently generalising usage of “thing” in line one \[‘When I consider
euery thing that growes’\] disguis\[es\] the decisive recognition that,
while men and plants are alike technically *things that grow*, the
difference is that man’s soul traditionally does not grow but is the
immortal part immune to physical time.’[^442] The grafting operation
desired by Shakespeare’s speaker is therefore aberrant from what Prynne
presents as the conventional Christian perspective, seeking to prolong
the life of the body rather than that of the soul. The technicalities of
grafting as a process further destabilise the metaphor. As Prynne points
out,

> \singlespacing the action of grafting requires three components: the
> stock or basal part of a plant; the scion or shoot from another and
> preferred species; and the grafter. The last two need give little
> trouble, since the grafter is the poet-lover and the scion is the
> image of the beloved in his youthful beauty and perfection. But what
> is the stock?[^443]

\noindent Prynne’s candidate is the poem itself, or the sequence of
poems which makes up the *Sonnets*. Yet this possibility introduces a
tension insofar as a grafting stock has no independent life of its
own—once the grafting process is complete, the scion determines almost
all future activity. Either the poet’s creations are merely supporting
structures for their images of the beloved, or the beloved himself is
the stock supporting the growth of the poems, a possibility which seems
almost sacrilegious in the broader context of the Renaissance sonnet
sequence and its ideological underpinnings. Prynne concludes with the
suggestion that the flawed and self-contradictory nature of the grafting
analogy—earlier, he refuses to describe it as an ‘image’, ‘since the
metaphoric device cannot be envisaged in any way literally or as
intelligible to the mind’s eye’—might be part of a deliberate strategy
of self-sabotage, causing the structure of the poem to fail at its apex
in order to reveal something more profound about the nature of desire
and its (non)fulfilment.[^444] Is it possible, he asks, ‘that the image
will not work quite seriously enough to be taken seriously; and
deliberately thus, as to take it with full seriousness would be to
discover that it could not work at all?’[^445]

How, then, does Prynne’s argument in *Graft and Corruption* relate to
the subjects which were identified at the beginning of this section,
principally sexual maturity and the body? Prynne uses youth and maturity
as oppositional terms in his discussion of writers such as Lewis and
Oliver, painting American poets as ‘art-gallery nympholepts’ concerned
only with a ‘pre-sexual phenomenology’ that is essentially, and
unfortunately, French. This national coding ties into a broader
structure counterposing solid, serious work and frivolous artificiality,
which can be detected as the basis of many comments in Prynne’s letters
in this period. Writing to the American poet Robin Blaser in 1973, for
instance, with a stinging critique of his work, Prynne refers to ‘the
fashionable French intellectual, more than content with the sawdust of
rhetoric in place of the true honie & gall on the lips of the poet’—a
poet who, as the archaic orthography of the proverbial ‘honey and gall’
suggests, is English by default.[^446] There seems at first glance to be
a ready-made counterpart to this structure in the opposition between
natural growth and grafting. Natural growth shares all the qualities
implicitly promoted by Prynne: it is the product of sexual reproduction
among mature plants whose physical proximity ensures a certain level of
indigeneity. Grafting, by contrast, involves the eminently artificial
importation of ‘foreign’ shoots (within certain genetic limits) with the
explicit purpose of rendering sexual reproduction unnecessary. Thus,
while grafted plants are not strictly ‘pre-sexual’ in the sense that
they are unable to reproduce, what they exhibit is a sort of
fast-tracked or counterfeit maturity. Moreover, if a process of
continual regrafting such as that seemingly described in Sonnet 15 takes
place, then they will not even need to sexually reproduce themselves.
The connection is more than conceptual: at one point in the text, Prynne
notes that ‘\[i\]n earlier literary usage, often allegorical, the
characteristic term for scion is *ympe*’, a word with a pleasing
similarity, if not a direct etymological connection, to *nymph*.[^447]

Prynne’s argument in *Graft and Corruption* is, however, too subtle to
conform to the strict correspondence described above. Having raised the
issue of grafting’s supposed artificiality and circumvention of nature,
he refuses to accept this easy characterisation, instead embarking on a
lengthy discussion of the concept of artificiality itself. Prynne first
quotes Polixenes in *The Winter’s Tale*, who uses a grafting analogy to
provide the ‘traditional defence’ of artifice:

> \singlespacing \hspace{100pt} we marry\
> A gentler Sien, to the wildest Stocke,\
> And make conceyue a barke of baser kinde\
> By bud of Nobler race. This is an Art\
> Which do’s mend Nature: change it rather, but\
> The Art it selfe, is Nature.[^448]

\noindent The supposedly persuasive appeal to tradition in this argument
in fact renders it unconvincing, not least to its intended fictional
recipient, Perdita, who as Prynne notes ‘finds it to be freakish and
contaminated \[and\] refuses to accept the act of grafting as safely
within the permitted and natural order of things.’[^449] There is,
however, a further level to Prynne’s discussion. Through a consideration
of the gradual accretion of pejorative connotations around the word
‘conceit’, Prynne reveals the complex and multiple layers of
artificiality which make up such tropes: ‘grafting was recognised as a
curious, subtle and conceited action \[…\]; in figurative contexts this
element of conceitfulness is compounded, since the trope is itself a
product of inventive conceit and (by extension) is itself termed “a
conceit.”’[^450] The end result of this spiral of artificiality is to
reveal how the system extends in both directions: if the use of grafting
as a way to describe artificiality is a conceit, then the bias towards
nature is itself artificial, if not in its origin then certainly in its
persistence. The maintenance of a distinction between nature and
artifice—a precondition of the privileging of nature—is dependent on
rhetorical and metaphorical techniques which are just as constructed as
those used in an argument such as Polixenes’s.

vi. Conclusion
--------------

When *Graft and Corruption* is added to the group of non-fictional texts
which have already been considered in this chapter—principally letters
from Prynne—a gap seems to emerge between two styles of discourse: one
which pays scrupulous attention to its own prejudices and assumptions,
and another which allows itself to fall into brisk approbations and even
brisker dismissals, generally of literary work which differs in some
obvious respect from Prynne’s own. The contradiction is similar to that
which was described in Chapter 2, between Prynne’s high-minded remarks
on the role of prose in little magazines or worksheets such as *The
English Intelligencer* and his actual practice. Yet the fact that there
is such a gap, even between texts produced at roughly the same time, is
important. As a necessary response to centuries of gendered and
racialised violence, the prevailing culture of literature and the
academic humanities in the 2010s privileges qualities such as empathy,
critical self-examination and attention to difference. In this context,
if all of Prynne’s non-fictional prose was equally vitriolic, it might
easily be written off *in toto* as lacking in contemporary relevance:
less Lewis than Leavis. That it is in fact so heterogeneous
paradoxically extends a saving umbrella over all of it, effectively
guaranteeing at least the possibility of insight in even the most acid
texts. It would appear important, then—if a reliable understanding of
Prynne’s relation to fictional prose is to be reached—to trace the
outline of this gap over the necessarily vague set of supposedly
positive and negative characteristics considered above. Thus, we can
separate a tendency to dismiss writers by implying their exclusion from
the category of sexual maturity—‘pre-sexual’, ‘old granny’—from the
question of what an aesthetic attachment to sexual maturity might
actually mean. By the same token, to ascribe specific aesthetic
qualities to lazy national stereotypes does not necessarily diminish the
value of those qualities attributed to the speaker’s own nation—in
Prynne’s case, soundness, solidity, effectively truth itself—though it
may be difficult to disentangle them from the conceptual system in which
they are set forth.

In order to provide a final assessment of the conjunction of these
qualities, it will be helpful to return to the most extensive of the
non-fictional prose texts mentioned so far—Prynne’s January 1972 letter
to Oliver. The description in this text of American poets as
‘art-gallery nympholepts’ has already been considered in detail; the
countervailing term against which this assessment is made has not.
Before turning to French and American work, Prynne notes with approval
how ‘the Anglo team have their teeth really sunk into pain, great
physical gouts of it’. In the list of work given to support this
statement, Prynne includes his own 1971 collection *Brass*. Even more
relevant is 1974’s *Wound Response*, in which the *PTM* appears and
which includes an epigraph from a 1966 scientific work, *Touch, Heat and
Pain*.[^451] What is it about pain as a literary subject that Prynne
finds so worthy of praise? Plainly, it is related to the concern with
the body discussed above. As Elaine Scarry points out, human pain is
characterised by its incommunicability:

> \singlespacing When one hears about another person’s physical pain,
> the events happening within the interior of that person’s body may
> seem to have the remote character of some deep subterranean fact,
> belonging to an invisible geography that, however portentous, has no
> reality because it has not yet manifested itself on the visible
> surface of the earth.[^452]

\noindent Yet pain is arguably also the body’s most immediate mode of
relation to the external environment: the most extreme form of that
‘resistance’ which, as Prynne discusses in *Resistance and Difficulty*,
allows us to experience the world. Moreover, if *The Secret Life of
Plants*—seemingly a key influence on, if not strictly a source text for,
the *PTM*—is to be believed (admittedly a considerable ‘if’), pain is
not a sensation confined to humans, or even to the animal world: one of
the very first experiments described in detail by Tompkins and Bird
involves a dragon tree supposedly reacting not just to pain, but to the
threat of future pain.[^453] In this context, pain becomes abstracted,
converted into something more like a general interface language between
the living and the non-living. This chapter will conclude by suggesting
that it is precisely this interface point with which Prynne is most
deeply concerned in his comments on Lewis, Oliver and Upward, as well as
in his own example of prose fiction, the *PTM*. What is more, it is a
subject which is fundamentally linked to his views on poetic creation,
as discussed in Chapter 2.

Alongside and related to the body, one of the key concerns identified
above was sexual reproduction. It is difficult to think of a subject
more intimately concerned with the relation between the living the
non-living, involving as it does the creation of the former from the
latter—or, to put it another way, the creation of a new instance of the
former from two existing ones. This is the scientific field, embryology,
which preoccupied Joseph Needham in the first phase of his career,
before his turn to sinology following the Second World War. Katko makes
clear the scientific relevance of Needham to the *PTM*, demonstrating in
particular how Prynne relies on the latter’s article ‘Chemical
Heterogony and the Ground-Plan of Animal Growth’.[^454] Not pursued,
however, is the potential connection between the ‘London PTM
Conference’—an explicitly interdisciplinary event, part academic and
part social, concerned specifically with the meshing of biology and
physics—and the Biotheoretical Gathering, a similarly focused informal
research group of which Needham was a founding member. Described by
Pnina G. Abir-Am as a ‘scientific Bloomsbury’, the Gathering—whose
members, besides Needham, included C.H. Waddington, Joseph Woodger,
Dorothy Wrinch and J.D. Bernal—was active throughout the mid-period of
the 1930s and concerned itself with the development of a syncretic
‘mathematico-physico-chemical morphology’.[^455]

The possibility of a connection between the *PTM* and the Gathering is
raised negatively in a September 1974 letter from Oliver to Prynne.
Describing his failed attempts to ‘lift the masks’—i.e. to identify what
he assumes to be the real figures behind Prynne’s characters—Oliver
remarks that ‘Quondam Lichen seems rather too advanced for C.H.
Waddington’ (Prynne to Oliver, 11 September 1974). Interest in the
group’s activities from the Rockefeller Foundation very nearly led to
the endowment of a dedicated institute at Cambridge, but the reigning
scientific authorities’ personal and political antipathy towards
Needham, as well as the group’s threat to established disciplinary
boundaries, saw the project axed.[^456] Nevertheless, as Abir-Am
convincingly argues, the research programme of the Gathering helped make
possible ‘the currently dominant DNA-centred conception of molecular
biology \[…\]. Indeed “molecular biology” surfaced as a catchier
abbreviation of the lengthier and cumbersome self-description of the
Biotheoretical Gathering’s brief collective discourse’.[^457] There can
be few clearer representatives of this ‘currently dominant \[…\]
conception’ than Needham and Prynne’s colleague at Caius, Francis Crick,
who in 1953 was jointly responsible for the discovery of the structure
of DNA itself.[^458] Writing to Dorn in 1978, Prynne describes a dinner
with Crick and Needham, noting that ‘\[t\]here was a touch of electric
collusion in the air, since the former should (& could) have succeeded
the latter’; it is unclear whether he is referring to general
intellectual succession or to something more prosaic such as the
mastership of Caius, which had fallen from Needham to the lawyer William
Wade two years earlier.[^459] In any case, Prynne was clearly in regular
contact with Crick throughout the 1970s, and appears to have maintained
the view—expressed to Dorn as a newly minted fellow in 1963—that the
biologist was ‘something close to genius.’[^460]

One of the aspects of Crick’s later research which seems to have most
interested both Prynne and Dorn is the theory of panspermia: the
hypothesis that life on Earth originated from microorganisms which
travelled here from elsewhere in the universe, either through accidental
contact with bodies such as meteoroids or through deliberate
‘fertilisation’ by intelligent alien life. In 1973, Crick co-authored a
paper with the chemist Leslie Orgel, using ‘the theorem of detailed
cosmic reversibility’—‘if we are capable of infecting an as yet lifeless
extrasolar planet, then, given that the time was available, another
technological society might well have infected our planet when it was
still lifeless’—to argue for at least the possibility of the latter, a
theory known as ‘directed panspermia’.[^461] Crick later elaborated this
theory in a monograph, *Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature* (1981), the
UK publication of which prompted a letter from Prynne.[^462] Here,
Prynne offers an extension to the hypothesis, speculating about the
potential motives of an alien civilisation which, to have reached the
stage of fertilising other planets, is ‘likely to have persisted in the
development and satisfaction of an intense intellectual curiosity.’ He
points out that ‘\[t\]he far-sighted would think out the predicaments
produced by instances of success \[…\] recognis\[ing\] that, in a
successfully evolved colony, the question would inevitably arise there
about their own origins.’ Prynne’s following questions are worth quoting
at length:

> \singlespacing Would it have been completely satisfactory to leave the
> discovery of an indisputably extraterrestrial origin, for this sibling
> culture, to an extremely sophisticated interpretation of increasingly
> distant and fragmentary evidence (e.g. the fossil record)? Would not a
> good scientist of that earlier culture (from whose common genetic
> stock we here would, by the hypothesis, be remotely descended) not
> \[*sic*\] recognise that a later scientific curiosity would deserve to
> have been given evidence about its own origin, so far as this were
> possible, and that a good scientist does not intervene in events
> without leaving a record that he has done so?

\noindent What begins in the language of intellectual satisfaction here
takes on an unmistakably moral tone: to leave a sign of one’s
intervention is the job of an implicitly god-like ‘good scientist’, and
no more than what we, as that intervention’s products, ‘deserve’. Prynne
thus approaches something like an ethics of interplanetary contact. The
process of planetary seeding—Crick and Orgel’s preferred term, a
contrast to the ‘infection’ of undirected or accidental panspermia—is
perhaps therefore analogous to horticultural grafting, an artificial
transplantation of an active shoot to a passive stock. The good
scientist is, by the same token, a cousin of the ‘good gardiner’
described by George Puttenham (and cited by Prynne roughly two years
before his letter to Crick), who ‘by his arte will not only make an
herbe, or flower, or fruite, come forth in his season without
impediment, but also will embellish the same in vertue, shape, odour and
taste, that nature of her selfe woulde neuer haue done.’[^463] He
(Prynne’s pronoun) is clearly also related to the broadly
non-interventionist creator God of Enlightenment deism, the creed to
which the real-life Erasmus Darwin enthusiastically subscribed.[^464]

In fact, the provision of readable clues is just one part of a broader
implicit ethical stance—characterised first and foremost by intellectual
responsibility—which it is tellingly easy to apply to other processes
raised by the readings of Prynne’s work in this and the preceding
chapters. Prynne’s good scientist relates to his creation in a manner
strikingly similar to the attitude of loving obedience described in
Murdoch’s ‘The Idea of Perfection’, and thus also to Oliver’s
attitude—described implicitly by Prynne—to the ‘body’ of *The Harmless
Building*, a body which is identified partly with that of his son.[^465]
Whether technically omnipotent or not, the good scientist is bound by
ethical strictures which are larger than himself: his creations, who
share his ‘genetic stock’, ‘deserve’ certain forms of care and
attention. In another sense, the good scientist provides a structural
mirror for the attitude to poetic creation and the subsequent relation
to the poetic object described at the end of Chapter 2. Life on Earth is
like a poem, a new addition to the resistant world, and just as with a
poem it is no more recuperable by its author for having been
scrupulously signed and dated.[^466] The link to Prynne’s implicit
intervention in the so-called population debate, described in Chapter 2,
is less clear, partly because the intervention itself is vague, calling
for a ‘rewriting’ of Shelley which never actually appears. Nevertheless,
it is fairly clear that Prynne’s pro-procreative attitude here, and his
positioning of prose as the ‘evolutionary’ means of disseminating that
attitude, is at least on the same wavelength as his enthusiasm for
panspermia.[^467] The same can be said of his attitude to metaphor,
honed in his response to Leavis in the *Times Literary Supplement*.
While Leavis writes as if there was a literary population crisis,
opposing the unruly ‘propagation’ and ‘generation’ of metaphorical
vehicles in Shelley’s poetry, Prynne encourages it. It is, finally,
possible to link Prynne’s version of the panspermia hypothesis to his
comments on the value of education, considered in relation to Leavis at
the end of Chapter 1. Here, Prynne offers an explicitly procreative and
sexual model of cultural transmission, with the father or mother’s
literary education allowing them to set their offspring up for their own
life of intellectual curiosity, much as the good scientist anticipates
the future intellectual enquiries of the denizens of a fertilised
planet.

The concerns listed above relate to each other not directly but through
a system of structural homology, generally based on the axis of scale.
Prynne’s thought shifts between levels—from the plant to the animal
world, the human to the family to the aesthetic to the
interplanetary—and reveals, in the process, shared structures and
patterns, much as in a typological reading of scripture. This has long
been recognised as a fundamental characteristic of Prynne’s poetry: the
first chapter of the first book-length study of his work, Reeve and
Kerridge’s *Nearly Too Much*, is titled ‘Questions of Scale’. That it
obtains similarly in the argumentative structure of his published and
unpublished prose work has been less clear. Importantly, the
identification of homologies is not just an *effect* of Prynne’s work,
but also, in some cases, its explicit subject. This is most obvious in
the very text under consideration above, Prynne’s March 1982 letter to
Crick, which goes on to offer structural isomorphism as the condition
for that deliberate sign left by the good scientist:

> \singlespacing what might be required could be a recognisably
> non-random match (say, numerical or morphological) between one part of
> the system and another which was functionally and causationally
> distant from it. Such a match would be the message in a bottle,
> confirming that we are survivors and not self-made.

\noindent As Katko helpfully points out, though not in reference to this
particular letter, a ‘non-random match’ of this sort—what Needham
describes as ‘a system of ratios and relations, which may be possibly
the same in all animals, in a word, a chemical-ground plan of animal
growth’—is a key feature of the *PTM*’s biochemical hinterland.[^468] In
the letter to Crick, Prynne is more cautious, but in diligently tracing
both possibilities—the presence of a message and its absence—to their
various logical conclusions, he ends up revealing something more
important about his basic intellectual and ethical stance:

> \singlespacing The first \[possibility\] is that messages are there
> and we have not found them or not noticed their significance (which
> ought, if efficient, to be self-confirming). The second is that they
> are not there. This second category divides into (a) because they were
> originally there but have been lost, or (b) because the original
> scientists attached no priority to including a message, or decided
> against it, or (c) because in fact there was no original scientist in
> our genealogy, since we ourselves are the first such in our family
> tree.

Prynne admits that ‘these thoughts do nothing to resolve the fundamental
uncertainty’, and even that ‘to look for a message must, I suppose,
inevitably increase the possibility of deluding oneself that a message
has been found’. Crucially, however, he does not therefore abandon the
search, concluding the letter with a re-affirmation that ‘the question
of a message built into the fundamental structure does strike me as one
for which a small niche might be found; even if its position there were
merely that of an ornament, or an irritant, or both.’ This structure—the
growth of a pearl of logic around a minute grain of its ‘irritant’
opposite (hope, free choice, the deliberate suspension of accuracy)—is
absolutely characteristic of Prynne’s thought, corresponding, for
example, to the declaration of uncertainty which concludes ‘A Note on
Metal’ or the act of instantiation which makes a new poem part of the
world. In a version of Pascal’s wager in which the prize is not heavenly
but immanent, Prynne implicitly exhorts us to copy the behaviour of a
good scientist who we have no proof ever existed—for it is precisely by
such a circular imitation of our own projections (an idea which is by no
means negatively coded), transposing them on to every level and scale of
our experience, that we develop an ethics. In fact, of course, this is
all we are—but it is the refusal to accept this condition which allows
us finally to live in it. Writing to Dorn about Crick’s *Life Itself*,
Prynne quotes the author’s contention that ‘chance is the only source of
true novelty’, ‘chance’ being Crick’s particular irritant grain. ‘I tell
that to the tip of my pencil, every day’, continues Prynne, ‘and it
fills in the missing step: “chance is the main source of true boredom
and only that is the source of novelty.”’[^469] \newpage

Conclusion
==========

> \singlespacing Be influenced by as many great artists as you can, but
> have the decency either to acknowledge the debt outright, or to try to
> conceal it —Ezra Pound.[^470]

\noindent As much as identifying particular traditions and histories
which shape the work of Prynne’s early career, the task of this thesis
has been to make the simple point that such shaping happens at all. Even
in the present context of increasing scholarly interest in Prynne, and
despite the deeply historical tendencies of both his poetic and his
critical work, this remains what he would term a ‘non-trivial
pursuit’.[^471] Introducing the recent *Cambridge Introduction to
British Poetry, 1945–2010*—notable for its strong acknowledgement of
Prynne’s place in twentieth-century literary history—Eric Falci mounts
an extended defence of his essentially historicist critical approach:
‘the form that a poem takes is not simply a matter of choice for an
aesthetic free agent who can survey the history of poetry and select
from among its myriad options while remaining untethered to that
history. \[…\] History doesn’t determine form, but a poem is nonetheless
marbled by its context.’[^472] Falci’s simultaneous disavowal both of
rigid historical determinism and of an unfashionably poet-centred
approach is one solution to a contradiction which sits at the heart of
contemporary literary history, in which materialism must be affirmed at
the same time as a taboo against biographical criticism is upheld. In
steering between the Scylla and Charybdis of determinist history and
literary journalism, however, it risks the charge of having no proper
object. The vagueness of the marbling analogy is revealing: history
somehow gets *into* poems, like a mineral impurity, rather than shaping
them from outside, and it does so automatically, with only minimal
mediation by a poet. This might at first glance seem to be Prynne’s own
position, epitomised in the sarcastic remark from ‘Mental Ears and
Poetic Work’: ‘Look, the poet is wearing red socks! Now at last we
understand everything!’[^473] Yet everywhere from undergraduate teaching
notes to his published commentaries on Wordsworth and George Herbert,
Prynne makes extensive and unapologetic use of biographical material—not
as ‘colour’ for the main analysis, but as a fundamental tool, showing
*how* history gets where it does.[^474]

Any biographically minded approach to Prynne must, nevertheless, contend
with the poet’s own published comments on the irrelevance of such
criticism to his work. This attitude is expressed explicitly in a prose
piece from late 2015, a transcription of ‘a faxed memorandum sent to
\[Joshua\] Kotin and \[Jeff\] Dolven, who recently interviewed the
author for a forthcoming issue of *The Paris Review*.’[^475] Here,
discussing the cover images used for the Bloodaxe editions of *Poems*,
Prynne acknowledges that ‘\[n\]one of these publications shews a human
figure, still less an author-likeness’, attributing this firstly to his
‘well-attested distaste for self-promotion or any kind of personality
interest attaching to the writer as the performing origin (“ego
scriptor”) of text.’ He continues:

> \singlespacing The self-life is mere domestic anecdotage, in its
> original sense, and there is not much overt idea of inherent personal
> opinion or life-story deployed visibly in my work (though under
> indirection may be another matter). It is in my view merely vulgar to
> publish work with your face run up the flagpole, in concession to
> reader curiosity when close engagement with the interior of writing
> work will open up many kinds of interiority, yours and mine.[^476]

\noindent Prynne goes on to discuss what he considers to be a more
important reason for avoiding author photos, to do with his own
hyper-materialist view of poetic language (the poem, once created, is
part of the resistant world external to the subject), but for the
purposes of this thesis it is the first explanation which is most
interesting. There is a fundamental contradiction implicit in Prynne’s
statement: disclaiming personal authority in a letter voluntarily sent
in the wake of an interview for a literary magazine. The interview forms
part of what is perhaps the most famous and comprehensive set of
interviews with twentieth-century writers; interviews, moreover, with an
explicitly biographical focus. The blurb for a 2006 collected volume
describes the *Paris Review* interviews as ‘an essential and definitive
record of the writing life.’[^477] It is Prynne’s first substantial
interview since his conversation with Peter Orr for the British Council
in 1964 and forms part of a more general easing-up of anti-biographical
vigilance in recent years. Representative of this tendency is the 2008
lecture-essay ‘Huts’, which is peppered with exactly the sort of
biographical anecdote which Prynne deplores in his letter to Kotin and
Dolven. (In fact, the term ‘anecdote’ is insufficient, referring
etymologically—as Prynne implies in the letter—to ‘things
unpublished’.[^478]) Near the beginning of the essay, for example,
Prynne remarks that ‘those of my generation who can remember being
conscripted for National Service will surely recall being assigned to
camp huts for training and manifest discomforts; I used to sleep in
rolled-up newspaper, in effort to keep out the fierce winds that blew in
under the floorboards’.[^479] Later, he describes visiting huts in
China, the Austrian alps and the German *Schwarzwald* over a period of
more than forty years. This anecdotal style mirrors that used during
readings at the beginning of his career: in his 1971 York Street Commune
reading in Vancouver, Prynne covers topics ranging from his evacuation
during the Second World War to his neighbours’ cat, often spending more
time on anecdotes than on the poems themselves.[^480]

Making use of such material for the purposes of biographical analysis
allows Prynne to be reinserted into a broad, twentieth-century literary
tradition from which he is too often excluded, both by his supporters
and by his detractors. Once the critical lens is focussed properly,
Prynne’s position in this tradition is not at all difficult to see,
emerging in areas as seemingly banal as his professional name. As Terry
Eagleton notes in a recent review of D.J. Taylor’s *The Prose Factory*,

> \singlespacing [t]he Victorians did not generally call themselves by
> the initials of their first two names plus their surname \[…\] and
> neither do most authors from roughly the second half of the 20th
> century onwards. \[…\] Between these two periods, however, this
> largely male habit of self-designation spreads thick and fast: H.G.,
> T.S., W.B., E.M., D.H., L.P., W.H. and so on.’[^481]

\noindent That Prynne’s adoption of the style is a deliberate choice
rather than a reversion to default is shown, paradoxically, by the
indecision with which it is made. Prynne’s first published poem, in the
1955 sixth-form magazine *Six*, is credited to ‘J.H.’, yet as late as
*Prospect* 6, two years after the publication of *Force of Circumstance*
(also ‘J.H.’), he is listed as ‘Jeremy’. The style would of course have
been familiar from institutional contexts: the Jesus College yearbooks
for the period of Prynne’s undergraduate course consistently initialise
names, as do some military records. Prynne’s entirely optional decision
to adopt it for literary purposes, however, signals a claim to occupy a
certain tradition, the more so as the style had clearly gone out of
fashion by the 1960s—in contemporary magazines, Prynne’s is often the
only initialised name on the contents page, and in circulation lists for
*The English Intelligencer* he is accompanied only by his college friend
R.F. Langley.[^482] In Prynne’s case, that tradition might owe as much
to, say, R.P. Blackmur, the American poet and critic cited in
‘Resistance and Difficulty’, as it does to T.S. Eliot or even F.R.
Leavis. Nevertheless, it *is* a tradition, one which is both eminently
mainstream and—at least for Prynne in the 1950s and early
’60s—relatively recent. A similar reversion to tradition can be seen in
what is apparently Prynne’s clearest rejection of it; namely, his
enthusiastic suppression of *Force of Circumstance*. While Prynne’s
symbolic repudiation of the poetic technique of his debut collection is
avant-garde in content, leading to the stylistic innovation of his later
work, it is totally conventional in form. Its two clearest forbears are
Charles Tomlinson’s suppression of his own debut pamphlet, *Relations
and Contraries*, and W.H. Auden’s obsessive exclusion of early
poems—notably ‘Spain’—from collected editions during his lifetime.

Discussions of Prynne’s influences are frequently divided along lines of
will, choice or intention. On the one hand, he is presented—to some
extent correctly—as a sort of polymath, evincing a deep knowledge both
of the literary matters that constitute his immediate field of
professional expertise and of a surprisingly disparate range of other
subjects, including the technical and the scientific. This is a level of
influence which might be described as self-directed, and whose already
considerable scope seems to expand with every new reading of Prynne’s
work. When poetic influence in the more diffuse, environmental sense is
discussed, however, Prynne appears as the product of a highly restricted
field: Ezra Pound, Charles Olson, Ed Dorn and perhaps two or three more
canonical poets such as Wordsworth are the only figures regularly
acknowledged as major influences on Prynne’s mature work, despite his
evidently close and prolonged reading of scores of other poets, both in
English and in other languages. Even in the case of the poets mentioned
above, influence is often presented as something directed by Prynne:
dissatisfied with the moribund state of English poetry in the late
1950s, he sought out new work from across the Atlantic. This thesis has
made the case for a new category of influences situated chronologically
in the period 1955–75 and geographically in Britain. These influences
differ from one another not only in content, but also structurally, and
can be summarised as follows.

The first is the literary and literary-critical culture represented by
the poetry of the Movement and the criticism of F.R. Leavis, as well as
their respective and mutual offshoots, considered in Chapter 1. Absorbed
pedagogically and institutionally through the relatively homogeneous
environments of the 1950s public school and Cambridge college, these
influences accordingly emerge in the most pedagogical and institutional
aspects of Prynne’s life and work: the early lecture text on Victorian
poetry, for example, or his much later notes for English students at
Caius. The broadest of the three fields of influence examined in this
thesis, it is also the most conventional, both in its cultural
prominence and in its mode of operation. The second is the British side
of the avant-garde little magazine scene towards which Prynne turned in
the early 1960s, as described in Chapter 2. While apparently deliberate,
this turn loses some of its force when the lack of any ‘third way’ for
publication and distribution is considered, Prynne having by this point
decisively rejected the mainstream channels offered by a figure like
Donald Davie. Unlike the form of influence described in the previous
chapter, in which specific critical attitudes or tenets are either
adopted or negated, this *milieu* makes its influence felt structurally,
as the material context in which Prynne’s thought takes place.
Accordingly, its effect is more like a negative imprint: its trace
appears at the very moment that Prynne attempts to reach beyond it, most
obviously in his letter to Peter Riley of 15 September 1967 and in the
prose piece ‘A Note on Metal’. The third and final field of influence
explored in this thesis is more diffuse, being represented by the
fiction of Wyndham Lewis, Edward Upward and Douglas Oliver, discussed
alongside a number of other points of reference—notably the scientific
work of Francis Crick and Joseph Needham—in Chapter 3. In this case, the
process is a combination of the previous two: Prynne does not merely
adopt elements of these writers’ work in his own prose, nor does he
simply write against or around them. Rather, certain works by Prynne,
Lewis, Upward and Oliver form part of a broader nexus of conscious and
unconscious concerns which comes into focus when they are read together.
This nexus is comprised primarily of issues about national identity,
sexual maturity and reproduction.

Beyond the localised concept of the ‘good scientist’, the nexus formed
by these concerns has not yet been given a name. By way of conclusion,
this thesis will suggest one such name: fatherhood. From the
implantation and nurturing of a literary sensibility in the mind of a
child to the creation of the autonomous, resistant poem, and even to the
‘seeding’ of Earth itself, the structure of heterosexual reproduction
and child-rearing (as seen from the father’s perspective) seems to sit
behind much of what matters most deeply to the Prynne that emerges in
the foregoing pages. Ironically, this conclusion has been reached
through a mode of analysis that has striven precisely to avoid the most
common deployment of the fatherhood metaphor in literary studies, namely
the semi-Freudian model of poetic inheritance set out in Harold Bloom’s
*The Anxiety of Influence* (1973). This thesis’s focus on the context of
Prynne’s early career has of course reinforced a masculine approach to
his work, insofar as his educational, professional and even literary
surroundings in the 1950s, ’60s and ’70s were overwhelingly
male-dominated.[^483] Even so, its contention has been that Prynne’s
aesthetic, intellectual and ethical stance is the product of an
exceptionally diverse (though differentially weighted) pool of
influences, which certainly cannot be reduced to the patrilineal
Pound–Olson–Prynne structure presented in works such as Mellors’s *Late
Modernist Poetics*.[^484] Andrea Brady is right to point out that such
models risk becoming ‘fantasies of all-male reproduction’, particularly
when extended into the present.[^485] Yet, in what is perhaps itself a
Freudian structure, avoidance in this thesis of the concept of
fatherhood when discussing external influence has caused (or at least
allowed) it to emerge in the interpretation of the internals of Prynne’s
thought.

It is important to insist that any unconscious concern with fatherhood
in Prynne’s prose and correspondence coexists with a fully conscious and
highly critical attention to the nuclear family in his poetry, at least
from *Brass* onwards. One of the clearest examples is ‘The Bee Target on
his Shoulder’, the opening poem of *Brass*, which deals directly with
the figure of the father, using the word itself four times.[^486] In
this complex poem, the father is presented as a lurid and arbitrary
figure, simultaneously dangerous and ridiculous. First appearing as
someone who ‘command\[s\]’ (l. 7), his imperatives soon turn against
him—‘Do not love this man. He makes | Fridays unbearable’ (13)—only to
double back in the poem’s third act: ‘Love him’ (84).[^487] The
specifically English oppressiveness of enforced family
gatherings—‘*that’s* his | aunt with the brown teapot jammed | into
edible, macerated crumpet’ (28–30)—is shown in its proper relation to
real violence: ‘Together we love him limb from | limb’ (50–51).
According to Matthew Hall,

> \singlespacing [t]he position accentuated in the poem is the
> representation of the body politic of the familial unit, depicted as
> ‘a circle of teeth by the cosy fire.’ \[120\] The family collectively
> forms an estranged mouth which ventriloquises its consumptive patterns
> and its own wounded utterances, creating song from the shadow cast by
> loss.[^488]

\noindent As Sutherland notes, ‘The Bee Target on his Shoulder’ is
saturated with bathos: ‘moments of outright bathetic interruption in
this poem \[…\] are disruptive only if we permit ourselves to ignore the
differently modulated bathos of the lines that they appear to
interrupt’.[^489] Thus, in the poem’s final stages, an overbearingly
sentimental example of what Mellors describes as ‘bogus
quotation’—‘little | sister we sob merrily & settle down | by the newest
grave’ (112–14)—shows up the equally false and conventional nature of
what has gone before, visible most obviously in the dropping of the
possessive pronoun ‘her’: ‘Bravely she traces | the path of father’s
boots | on the lawn’.[^490] The pseudo-Victorianism of this passage—its
concern with small children and death, for example—raises through
implication the most oppressive and emotionally tyrannical aspects of
traditional fatherhood. Yet, far from proving the critical nature of all
of Prynne’s engagements with fatherhood and the family, the vigilant
skepticism of poems such as ‘The Bee Target on his Shoulder’ makes any
uncritical or unwitting adoption of these structures elsewhere in his
*oeuvre* all the more significant. Prynne is not a credulous consumer of
bourgeois ideology; rather, that ideology is so pervasive that it shapes
the thinking of even the most rigorously critical subject.

The *ur*-father provided for Prynne by Mellors is Ezra Pound, a poet
who, it was claimed at the beginning of this thesis, would ‘haunt every
one of the following chapters’.[^491] A characteristic example is
Prynne’s use of the term ‘ego scriptor’ above, a phrase which raises the
spectre of Pound—subject of multiple popular and scholarly biographies,
including David Moody’s three-volume, 1,650-page *Ezra Pound: Poet*—at
the very moment that he attempts to thwart biographical interest in his
own work.[^492] What, then, is the structure of this ‘haunting’, and
what does it say about that which it affects? Like Prynne, Pound is a
poet concerned at a deep level with problems of reproduction: one of the
crucial charges against ‘usura’ in Canto XLV, arguably the centre-piece
of the long poem that represents Pound’s lifework, is that it ‘slayeth
the child in the womb’.[^493] Pound is, however, much more ready than
Prynne to acknowledge direct poetic influence.[^494] The most famous
example of such acknowledgement is the early poem ‘A Pact’, a short
piece in which Pound explicitly positions himself in filial relationship
to Walt Whitman: ‘I come to you as a grown child | Who has had a
pig-headed father; | I am old enough now to make friends.’ Pound
presents his task as one of refinement: ‘It was you that broke the new
wood, | Now is a time for carving.’[^495] Prynne’s *oeuvre* contains no
such direct statement of influence. Yet, as was pointed out at the
beginning of this thesis, the intellectual and contextual
correspondences between Pound and Prynne are numerous, and arguably more
compelling than any equivalent similarities with, say, Olson or Dorn. In
particular, the blistering scorn of Prynne’s private and semi-private
tirades against poetic stupidity—matched only by the intellectual,
social and even financial generosity of his attempts to support and
promote those writers whose work he has considered important—is a
characteristic which cannot but be linked to the author of ‘How to
Read’.

If Pound is to be considered a poetic ‘father’ to Prynne, it is in
precisely the sense identified above: a relationship characterised by
distance, like that of the good scientist and his creation, but which
can also, with effort, be read backwards. The apparent conflict between
the disparate influences identified in this thesis and grand theories of
patrilineal poetic descent might therefore be dispelled by seeing Pound
and his career as a sort of over-arching formal influence within which
more local influences (Davie, Tomlinson, Leavis) emerge as content: an
image of the father as a matryoshka doll containing a set of
successively shrinking sub-fathers.[^496] The apparent genealogical
absolutism of this perspective is tempered if Pound—and Prynne’s
relationship to him—is understood as one formal structure among many.
Thus, a thesis which took Olson rather than Pound as its implicit
starting point may have come up with a quite different set of emphases
and influences, even where these influences have only a formal or
structural rather than a direct relation to Olson himself. It is
important to acknowledge such underlying structures, even and especially
when they emerge into view at the end of a process of argumentation
which they have helped to generate. Through reflection on the concept as
a crystallisation of the material that it produces (and that produces
it), that material can be viewed from a bird’s-eye perspective
structurally impossible in the analysis itself.

In the present case, the fact that a particularly patrilineal, Poundian
air emerges from a consideration of Prynne’s early career has the
potential to shed further light on the periodisation of his work. Would
the selection of a period other than 1955–75 for contextual
analysis—say, the period from the publication of *Poems* in 1982 to
Prynne’s retirement from academic life in 2005—have necessitated a
different structuring force? What is obscured by the structure that has
emerged? The type of poetic inheritance which it is possible to
extrapolate from the good scientist trope is, for one thing, entirely
androcentric.[^497] Descent is based structurally on the male side of
the reproductive process, with almost no regard for the female.[^498]
Any conception of poetic creation based even metaphorically on a
‘natural’ view of sexual reproduction is also heteronormative. To raise
these issues is not simply to nitpick from a more enlightened
cultural-historical position. It is not clear that poets’ thinking about
poetry can be placed on an ever-advancing political timeline, and even
if it could it is not obvious that any advance which would afford the
contemporary critic a privileged vantage point has in fact taken place.
What is clear is that androcentrism and heteronormativity are
recognisable parts of Prynne’s thinking about aesthetic practice in this
period—broadly encapsulated in the good scientist trope described at the
end of Chapter 3—rather than unfortunate aberrations to be explained
away. To put it plainly, when in the 1950s, ’60s and early ’70s Prynne
refers to ‘the poet’, this idealised figure is more or less implicitly a
heterosexual man.[^499]

The chronological qualifier in the last sentence is necessary, and—if a
poet’s thinking about poetry can be assumed to leave a trace in the work
itself—the restriction it imposes is to some extent backed up by
statistics. Figure @fig:man shows the results of analysing concatenated
scanned texts of *Force of Circumstance* and the 2005 edition of *Poems*
according to a very crude approximation of androcentricity: appearances
of the word ‘man’—used either as a singular noun or to refer to
‘mankind’—per 1,000 lines. A clear trend is visible, consisting of a
spike around the beginning of *The White Stones* (l. 1,800) and a steady
drop-off thereafter.[^500] For reference, the chronological scope of
this thesis terminates with *High Pink on Chrome* (1975) at around l.
8,350. Such analysis violently flattens the semantic complexity of
Prynne’s work—it is impossible to tell whether any given usage of ‘man’
is sincere, ironic, direct, reported, and so on—but offers a sort of
knowledge which can only be gained through such flattening, rather than
through readily disputable readings of individual usages. While it would
be foolish, then, to use Figure @fig:man as evidence of the
androcentricity of Prynne’s early work, if that quality is established
by other means then the diagram can be used to trace its probable
contours.[^501]

Writing to Douglas Oliver in 1994 on the subject of intellectual and
ethical consistency, Prynne claims that ‘it is not facile to speak of
ethical style, and to recognise that even within a single lifetime there
is room for many shifts which can nonetheless preserve a thread of
purposeful mutation.’[^502] This implicitly genetic model, in which the
subject is neither absolutely changeable nor absolutely consistent, is
perhaps helpful in coming to terms with Prynne’s own evolving opinions.
For his part, Prynne is well aware of changes in his own thinking and
practice, acknowledging later in the same letter that ‘my own habit now
is sharply altered from only a few years back.’ In the recent
lecture-essay ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, which presents a conception of
poetic composition as involving a sort of introjected double-self,
Prynne tackles the relation between poetry and gender directly:

> \singlespacing the dyadic relation of poet and imaginary \[…\] may not
> be accompanied by determined gender assignments. Either figure may be
> male or female, or may include features of both, like a system of
> Christian angels who, rather than owning no sexual identity at all,
> may present as equally responsive to both genders and both bodily
> incarnations, in cherishment and in trust.[^503]

\noindent That this statement might now be objected to for its
binarism—‘both genders and both bodily incarnations’—illustrates how
poetic thought exists in relation to an always-shifting social and
historical context; a context from which, as Prynne would be the first
to acknowledge, it does not have the luxury of severing itself. Earlier
in ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, Prynne writes that ‘being a good poet and
continuing to meet the self-challenge of not lapsing into mediocrity is
continuously difficult, a matter of struggle not easily handled because
intrinsically hard to recognize accurately’.[^504] Part of this
difficulty—and something that Prynne has striven to do throughout his
career—is to acknowledge the intersection of the poetic and the
political, even when they appear to be most separate, and especially
when the content of the latter is remote from the poet’s own personal
experience.

The poetical is personal and the personal is political. As Prynne
himself has it in the recent *Paris Review* interview, ‘the authorial
position is not reserved from any of the moral damage’.[^505] As long as
literary analysis is restricted to the texts of individual poems and not
extended to the persons who produce them, as well as to their non-poetic
work, much of the historical marbling described by Falci—‘History
doesn’t determine form, but a poem is nonetheless marbled by its
context’—will remain obscure. This point is made not from the standpoint
of a self-deluding common sense but from that of materialism: to confine
historicist analysis to individual texts is an error in the same
category as the formalist evacuation of context against which
historicist criticism itself reacts. In one of his clearest statements
of aesthetic principle, Prynne writes that ‘no poet has or can have
clean hands, because clean hands are themselves a fundamental
contradiction. Clean hands do no worthwhile work.’[^506] That his choice
of metaphor is bodily neatly illustrates the point in question. Poems do
not get written without hands, and those hands inevitably do other
things, from eating hamburgers to filling in ballot papers. This is
something, Prynne claims, that he ‘ha\[s\] believed throughout \[his\]
writing career’.[^507] Scholars of Prynne’s work owe it to the truth of
the first quotation not to take that of the second on trust. \newpage

Postscript
==========

Two weeks prior to the submission date for this thesis, the *Paris
Review* interview discussed in its Conclusion was published,
constituting an ‘edited fragment’ of a 152,000-word transcript.[^508]
The excerpt includes a substantial discussion of Prynne’s early career,
including his relationships with Donald Davie, Charles Tomlinson and Cid
Corman, and validates many of the judgements made on the basis of
archival evidence in the present text. Had the interview been published
earlier, this thesis may have spent less time on the basic details of
Prynne’s early career, but it is hoped that it will serve as a useful
companion text to the full interview when it becomes available. While
individual observations from the *Paris Review* excerpt have been
incorporated into this thesis where relevant, often as footnotes, no
substantial attempt has been made to revise the text as a whole.
\newpage

\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}

Bibliography
============

Archival material
-----------------

\singlespacing Due to the large number of letters cited from some boxes,
archival materials are listed in chronological order, with folder and/or
envelope numbers where necessary, under subheadings indicating the
collection, series and box in which they may be found.

### Thomas J. Dodd Research Center, University of Connecticut

**Cid Corman Papers**

*Series 1, Box 1*

Letter, J.H. Prynne to Cid Corman, 17 June 1961, Folder 17\
—, 18 October 1961, Folder 18\
—, 19 November 1961, Folder 19

**Edward Dorn Papers**

*Series 1, Box 19*

Letter, Prynne to Edward Dorn, 16 November 1961, Folder 328\
—, 29 November 1961, Folder 328\
—, 29 April 1962, Folder 328\
—, 9 July 1962, Folder 328\
—, 26 September 1962, Folder 328\
—, 10 December 1962, Folder 328\
—, 31 December 1962, Folder, 328\
—, 22 January 1963, Folder 329\
—, 14 April 1963, Folder 329\
—, 23 April 1963, Folder 329\
—, 16 June 1963, Folder 329\
—, 6 May 1964, Folder 330\
—, 30 June 1964, Folder 330\
—, 26 July 1964, Folder, 330\
Letter, Prynne to Robert Creeley, 21 October 1964, Folder 330\
Letter, Prynne to Diana Athill, 17 November 1964, Folder 330\
Letter, Prynne to Dorn, 21 December 1964, Folder 330\
—, 17 June 1965, Folder 331\
—, 26 January 1966, Folder 332

*Series 1, Box 44*

Letter, Prynne to Dorn, 10 January 1972, Folder 657\
—, 14 March 1972, Folder 657\
—, 25 March 1972, Folder 655\
—, 25 April 1972, Folder 657

*Series 1, Box 19*

Letter, Prynne to Robin Blaser, 28 August 1973, Folder 334\
Letter, Prynne to Dorn, 25 October 1972, Folder 334

*Series 1, Box 20*

—, 5 March 1975, Folder 335\
—, 9 September 1975, Folder 335\
—, 11 August 1978, Folder 336\
—, 18 March 1982, Folder 338

**Charles Olson Research Collection**

*Series 2, Box 206*

Letter, Prynne to Charles Olson, 4 November 1961\
—, 26 November 1961\
—, 8 January 1962\
—, 14 February 1962\
—, 9 September 1962\
—, 7 November 1962\
—, 3 February 1963\
—, 24 April 1963\
—, 28 December 1963\
—, 1 February 1964\
—, 29 February 1964\
—, 6 March 1964\
—, 24 June 1964\
—, 3 March 1965

### Special Collections, Albert Sloman Library, University of Essex

**Donald Davie Archive**

*Box 1*

Journal entry, 14 November 1958, Notebook (A)

**Douglas Oliver Archive**

*Box 9*

Letter, Prynne to Douglas Oliver, 9, 10 and 11 January 1972\
—, 11 September 1974\
—, 16 February 1986\
—, 5 September 1994

### Department of Manuscripts and University Archives, Cambridge University Library

**Peter Riley Papers**

*Series 2, Folder 34*

Unattached second page of letter, Prynne to Peter Riley, Envelope 1\
Letter, Prynne to Riley, 24 April 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 21 May 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 23 May 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 29 May 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 13 June 1967, Envelope 3\
—, 23 June 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 9 August 1967, Envelope 3\
—, 13 September 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 15 September 1967, Envelope 1\
—, 7 February 1968, Envelope 1\
—, 16 February 1969, Envelope 1\
—, 25 February 1969, Envelope 1\
—, 16 March 1969, Envelope 1

### Western Manuscripts, British Library

**Edward Upward: Supplementary Papers**

*Series 2, Folder 4*

Typescript, Donald Davie, ‘Remembering the Thirties’ \[1953\]\
Letter, A.C. Spearing to Edward Upward, 14 July 1959

*Series 3, Folder 15*

Biographical statement (‘Edward Falaise Upward. Born 9th September 1903
\[…\]’)\
‘Answers to questions from David Lambourne’

### Special Collections, Newcastle University Library

**Barry MacSweeney Papers**

*Series 3, Box 5, Folder 68*

Letter, Prynne to Barry MacSweeney, 7 August 1975

### Archives and Manuscripts, Wellcome Library

**Francis Crick Papers**

*Section D, Subsection 1, Series 5, Subseries 13, Box 20*

Letter, Prynne to Francis Crick, 22 March 1982.

Works by J.H. Prynne
--------------------

\setlength{\parindent}{-16pt} \setlength{\leftskip}{16pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{0pt} ‘& Hoc Genus Omne’, *Bean News* (1972),
\[p. 2\]

‘About Warning an Invited Audience (Obliquely Arising from George
Dowden’s Letters to English Poets)’, in *Certain Prose*, 2:\[‘Ghost
Issue’\] \[G3\], 168–69 (p. 168)

‘The Art of Poetry No. 101’, interviewed by Jeff Dolven and Joshua
Kotin, *The Paris Review*, 218 (Fall 2016), pp. 174–207

‘The Bee Target on his Shoulder’, in *Poems* (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 2015),
pp. 150–52

‘Charles Olson, Maximus Poems IV, V, VI’, *The Park*, 4.5 (Summer 1969),
pp. 64–66

‘Chi É’, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), p. 35

*Concepts and Conception in Poetry* (Cambridge: Critical Documents,
2014)

Contribution to a discussion in the Senate House, *Cambridge University
Reporter*, 141.15 (2011),\
&lt;http://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/reporter/2010–11/weekly/6211/section13.shtml&gt;
\[accessed 26 February 2014\]

‘Damp’, *Mica*, 2 (February 1961), p. 22

‘A Dialogue with Nicholas Royle’ (seminar, University of Sussex, 11
March 2014)

‘Die a Millionaire’, in *Poems*, pp. 13–16

‘Early Yesterday Morning’, *Satis*, 5 (Spring–Summer 1962), p. 14

Editorial note, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), \[p. 45\]

Editorial statement, *Six* (1955), \[unpaginated\]

‘The Elegiac World in Victorian Poetry’, *The Listener* (14 February
1963), pp. 290–91

‘English Poetry and Emphatical Language’, *Proceedings of the British
Academy*, 74 (1988), pp. 135–69

‘L’Extase de M. Poher’, in *Poems*, pp. 161–62

*Field Notes: ‘The Solitary Reaper’ and Others* (Cambridge: privately
printed, 2007)

‘Figments of Reflection’, *The Cambridge Review* (16 Feb 1963), pp. 281,
283

‘First Notes on Daylight’, in *Poems*, p. 69

‘Force of Circumstance’, in *Force of Circumstance and Other Poems*
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962), p. 1

‘from a letter’, *Mica*, 5 (Winter 1962), pp. 2–3, 28

‘From a Letter to Douglas Oliver’, *Grosseteste Review*, 6.1–4 (1973),
pp. 152–54

‘Full Tilt Botany: Ideal Weapons for Suicide Pacts’, *Bean News* (1972),
\[p. 8\]

*George Herbert, ‘Love \[III\]’: A Discursive Commentary* (Cambridge:
privately printed, 2011)

‘The Glacial Question, Unsolved’, in *Poems*, pp. 65–67

‘A Gold Ring Called Reluctance’, in *Poems*, pp. 21–23

*Graft and Corruption: Shakespeare’s Sonnet 15* (Cambridge: Face Press,
2015)

‘The Hazel Tree’, *Tomorrow*, 4 (1960), p. 15

‘Huts’, *Textual Practice*, 22.4 (December 2008), pp. 613–33

‘In Cimmerian Darkness’, in *Poems*, pp. 74–75

Interviewed by Peter Orr, *The Poet Speaks*, Programme 39 (6 January
1964)

*Kazoo Dreamboats; or, On What There Is* (Cambridge: Critical Documents,
2011)

‘Landfall’, *Lyrische Hefte*, 10 (November 1961), p. 19

Letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (16 August 1963), p. 629

Letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (28 May 1971), p. 620

‘A Letter’, in *Certain Prose*, 1:12 \[189–91\], pp. 28–29

‘The Library’s Place’, *Times Literary Supplement* (9 August 1963),
p. 609

‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, *Chicago Review*, 55.1 (November 2010),
pp. 126–57

‘“Modernism” in German Poetry’, *The Cambridge Review* (9 March 1963),
pp. 331–37

‘A Note to Josh Kotin and Jeff Dolven’, *No Prizes*, 4 (Winter 2015–16),
pp. 21–24

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Aristeas* (London: Ferry Press, 1968), pp. 14–17

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Certain Prose*, 2:1 \[286–89\], pp. 104–09

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Poems* (Edinburgh and London: Agneau 2, 1982),
pp. 125–30

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Poems* (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 1999), pp. 127–32

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Poems*, 2nd edn (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 2005),
pp. 127–32

‘A Note on Metal’, in *Poems*, pp. 127–32

‘Out of the shade’, *The Spectator* (19 January 1974), pp. 78–79.

‘A Pedantic Note in Two Parts’, in *Certain Prose*, 2:4 \[346–351\],
pp. 124–35

‘Perspective from a Chalk Pit’, *Mica*, 2 (February 1961), p. 23

‘The “PLANT TIME MANIFOLD” Transcripts’, *Grosseteste Review*, 7.1–3
(Summer 1974), pp. 80–88

‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’, in *Poems* (2015), pp. 233–42

Reading (York Street Commune, Vancouver, 1 August 1971), *Archive of the
Now*\
&lt;http://www.archiveofthenow.org/authors/?i=77&f=1762\#1762&gt;
\[accessed 17 December 2014\]

‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, *Chicago Review*, 58.1 (Summer 2013), pp. 89–105

‘In Praise’, *Satis*, 5 (Spring–Summer 1962), pp. 14–15

‘Reading Pound: Background’, *Gonville and Caius College*,\
&lt;http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk/students/study/english/pound/pound0.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 8 January 2016\]

‘Resistance and Difficulty’, *Prospect*, 5 (Winter 1961), pp. 26–30

*Stars, Tigers and the Shape of Words* (London: Birkbeck College, 1993)

‘Stille (nach Thomas Hood)’, *Six* (1955), p. 11

‘Surface Measures’, *Mica*, 4 (Fall 1961), p. 30

*They That Haue Powre to Hurt; A Specimen of a Commentary on
Shake-speares Sonnets, 94* (Cambridge: privately printed, 2001)

‘Times Trans-shifting: for Robert Herrick’, *Prospect*, 4 (Winter 1960),
p. 14

‘Tips on Reading, for Students of English’, *Gonville and Caius
College*,\
&lt;http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk/students/study/english/tips/reading.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 23 September 2014\], p. 14

‘Tomorrow is Fade Out Night’, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), pp. 41–43

‘Until Later On’, *Mica*, 4 (Fall 1961), p. 31

‘When is now’, *Bean News* (1972), \[p. 4\]

General
-------

Abir-Am, Pnina G., ‘The Biotheoretical Gathering, Transdisciplinary
Authority and the Incipient Legitimation of Molecular Biology in the
1930s: New Perspective on the Historical Sociology of Science’, *History
of Science*, 25 (1987), pp. 1–70

‘A century of U.S. influence on Arab education’, *The Times* (11 October
1966), p. 11

Advert, *The Times* (29 August 1969), p. 23

Alan Walker, *Edward Upward: A Bibliography* (London: Enitharmon Press,
2000)

Amis, Kingsley, *Lucky Jim* (London: Victor Gollancz, 1957)

Anderson, Perry, ‘Components of the National Culture’, *New Left
Review*, 1.50 (1968), pp. 3–57

‘anecdote, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2016),\
&lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/7367&gt; \[accessed 29 June 2016\]

Arblaster, Anthony, ‘Edward Upward and the Novel of Politics’ (1978),
*Edward Upward*,\
&lt;http://www.edwardupward.info/pdfs/Arblaster.pdf&gt; \[accessed 5 May
2015\]

Aristotle, *On Interpretation*, trans. by E.M. Edghill, in *The Works of
Aristotle*, vol. 1, ed. by W.D. Ross (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1928)

Aslıhan Yener, K., ‘Managing Metals: An Early Bronze Age Tin Production
Site at Göltepe, Turkey’, *The Oriental Institute News & Notes*, 140
(1994), pp. 1–4

Attridge, Derek, *Moving Words: Forms of English Poetry* (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2013)

Atwood, Margaret, *The Edible Woman* (London: Virago, 2009), p. 244

Bateson, F.W., ‘A Reply’, *Scrutiny*, 4.2 (September 1935), pp. 181–85

—, ‘The Responsible Critic’, *Scrutiny*, 19.4 (October 1953), pp. 317–21

Beatty, Michael, ‘The Earliest Fiction of Wyndham Lewis and *The Wild
Body*’, *Theoria*, 48 (May 1977), pp. 37–45

Bell, Clive, ‘What was “Bloomsbury”?’, *Twentieth Century* (February
1954), pp. 153–60)

Bernstein, Charles, ‘Introduction’, in *Close Listening: Poetry and the
Performed Word*, ed. by Bernstein (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1998), pp. 3–26

Blanton, C.D., ‘Nominal Devolutions: Poetic Substance and the Critique
of Political Economy’, *Yale Journal of Criticism*, 13 (2000),
pp. 129–51

Bloom, Harold, *The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry* (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1973)

Booker, M. Keith, *Literature and Domination: Sex, Knowledge, and Power
in Modern Fiction* (Gainesville, FL: University Press of Florida, 1993),
p. 34)

Brady, Andrea, letter, *Cambridge Literary Review*, 1.2 (Lent 2010),
pp. 244–49

Brannigan, John, *Archipelagic Modernism: Literature in the Irish and
British Isles, 1890–1970* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2015)

Bruns, Gerald, ‘Dialectrics; or, Turmoil & Contradiction: A Reading of
J. H. Prynne’s *Kazoo Dreamboats*’, *Chicago Review*, 57.3/4 (Winter
2013), pp. 54–70

Brinton, Ian, ed., *A Manner of Utterance: The Poetry of J.H. Prynne*
(Bristol: Shearsman, 2009)

—, ‘Prynne in Prospect’, *academia.edu*,\
&lt;https://www.academia.edu/6185230/Prynne\_in\_Prospect&gt; \[accessed
21 January 2015\]

Brooker, Peter and Andrew Thacker, eds., *The Oxford Critical and
Cultural History of Modernist Magazines, Volume II: North America
1894–1960* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012)

—, Andrew Thacker, Sascha Bru and Christian Weikop, eds., *The Oxford
Critical and Cultural History of Modernist Magazines, Volume III: Europe
1880–1940* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013)

Bucknell, Katherine, ‘Introduction’, in Christopher Isherwood and
Upward, *The Mortmere Stories* (London: Enitharmon Press, 1994),
pp. 9–21

Burrell, N.R., ‘The Language of Silence is no Paradox: Enervation &
Renewal in the Poetry of J.H. Prynne’ (unpublished doctoral thesis,
American University of London, 1993)

Burroway, Janet, ‘Was Too: Time Passed with David Daiches’, in *David
Daiches: A Celebration of His Life and Work*, ed. by William Baker and
Michael Lister (Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 2008), pp. 28–35

Butter, P.H., review, *Modern Language Review*, 64.2 (April 1969),
pp. 407–08

—, review, *Modern Language Review*, 65.4 (October 1970), pp. 882–83

Campbell-Johnston, Rachel, ‘The Difficult Matter; A Reading of the
Poetry of J.H. Prynne’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of
Edinburgh, 1994)

Carmody, Tim, ‘Paper Modernism’, *Snarkmarket* (9 August 2009),\
&lt;http://snarkmarket.com/blog/snarkives/selfdisclosure/paper\_modernism/&gt;
\[accessed 29 January 2015\]

‘Certain Matters’, in *Certain Prose of the English Intelligencer*, ed.
by Neil Pattison, Reitha Pattison and Luke Roberts (Cambridge: Mountain
Press, 2012), 2:\[‘Ghost Issue’\] \[G16–17\], pp. 173–75

Chaganti, Seeta, ‘Vestigial Signs: Inscription, Performance, and The
Dream of the Rood’, *PMLA*, 125 (2010), pp. 48–72

Chaloner, David, ‘Bonfire’, *The English Intelligencer*, 2.12 (September
1967), p. 477

Childe, V. Gordon, *The Prehistory of European Society* (London:
Cassell, 1962), p. 166

Chitty, Andrew, ‘The Early Marx on Needs’, *Radical Philosophy*, 64
(Summer 1993), pp. 23–31

Clark, Gregory, *A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of the
World* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), p. 286

Clark, Steve, ‘Prynne and the Movement’, *Jacket*, 24 (November 2003),\
&lt;http://jacketmagazine.com/24/clark-s.html&gt; \[accessed 27 November
2014\]

Conquest, Robert, *New Lines: An Anthology* (London: Macmillan, 1956)

Creeley, Robert, ‘The Grace’, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), pp. 25–28

Crick, Francis *Life Itself: Its Origin and Nature* (New York:
Touchstone Books, 1981)

— and L.E. Orgel, ‘Directed Panspermia’, *Icarus*, 19 (1973), pp. 341–46

Daiches, David, *A Critical History of English Literature* (New York:
The Ronald Press Company, 1960)

—, *A Third World* (Brighton: Sussex University Press, 1971), p. 39

Darwin, Erasmus, *The Botanic Garden. Part II* (Dudlin \[*sic*\]: J.
Moore, 1796),\
&lt;https://archive.org/details/botanicgardenpoe02darwuoft&gt;
\[accessed 13 June 2016\]

Davie, Donald, ‘Academicism and Jonathan Swift’, *Twentieth Century*
(September 1953), pp. 217–24

—, *Articulate Energy: An Inquiry into the Syntax of English Poetry*
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976)

—, *Collected Poems, 1950–1970* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1972)

—, *Events & Wisdoms* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964)

—, *Ezra Pound: Poet as Sculptor* (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1964)

—, ‘For Doreen. A Voice from the Garden’, in *Collected Poems
(Manchester: Carcanet, 1990)*, pp. 99–100

—, ‘Housekeeping’, in *Collected Poems* (1990), p. 104

—, ‘Is There a London Literary Racket?’, *Twentieth Century* (June
1954), pp. 540–46

—, ‘A Letter to Curtis Bradford’, in *Collected Poems* (Manchester:
Carcanet, 1990), pp. 98–99

—, ‘To a Brother in the Mystery’, in *New & Selected Poems* (Middletown,
CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1961), p. 46

—, *The Poems of Doctor Zhivago* (Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 1965)

—, *Purity of Diction in English Verse* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1952)

—, ‘A Reading of His Poems’ (reading, University of Cincinnati, 29 March
1963),\
&lt;http://drc.libraries.uc.edu/bitstream/handle/2374.UC/696768/Elliston\_Donald\_Davie\_03–29–63\_A\_Track\_07.mp3?sequence=15&gt;
\[accessed 16 December 2014\]

—, ‘Remembering the Movement’, in *The Poet in the Imaginary Museum:
Essays of Two Decades*, ed. by Barry Alpert (Manchester: Carcanet,
1977), pp. 72–75

—, ‘Spender Struggling’, *The New Statesman*, 65 (29 March 1963), p. 465

—, *These the Companions: Recollections* (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1982)

—, *Thomas Hardy and British Poetry* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1973)

— and D.J. Enright, ‘*New Lines* and Mr. Tomlinson’, *Essays in
Criticism*, 7.2 (April 1957), pp. 343–45

Dedication, *2R1* (January 1968), p. 2

Dobran, Ryan, ‘The Difficult Style: A Study of the Poetry of J.H.
Prynne’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 2013)

—, ‘J.H. Prynne’s “Aristeas, in Seven Years” and *The English
Intelligencer*’, *Journal of British and Irish Innovative Poetry*, 5.2
(2013), pp. 20–42

Dodsworth, Martin, ‘The Movement: Never and Always’, in *The Oxford
Handbook of Contemporary British and Irish Poetry*, ed. by Peter
Robinson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 94–110

Dubourg, Bernard, *Chansons à la Journée-Lumière* (Damazan: privately
printed, 1975)

—, *Lézard de Feu* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975)

—, *Poèmes de Cuisine* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975)

Eagleton, Terry, ‘A Toast at the Trocadero’, *London Review of Books*,
38.4 (18 February 2016), pp. 9–10

Editorial, in *Certain Prose*, 2:5 \[373\], p. 139

Editorial, in *Certain Prose*, 2:10 \[447\], p. 143

‘Editorial’, *Satis*, 5 (Spring–Summer 1962), p. 2

Editorial note, *The Egoist*, 6.7 (1 July 1916), p. 107

*Education Reform Act 1988* (London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office,
1989)

‘Elections to Fellowships’, *The Caian* (Lent 1963), p. 33

Enright, D.J., *Poets of the 1950s: An Anthology of New English Verse*
(Tokyo: Kenkyusha, 1955)

Falci, Eric, *The Cambridge Introduction to British Poetry,
pp. 1945–2010* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015)

Faraone, Mario, ‘“Chambers of Oblivion”: I Treni di Edward Upward tra
Allucinazione, Storia e Memoria’, in *Scorci Improvvisi di Altri
Orizzonti*, ed. by Faraone, Martina Bertazzon, Giovanna Manzato and
Roberta Tommasi (Morrisville, NC: Lulu, 2008), pp. 215–34

Feinstein, Elaine, ‘Remembering Prospect’, *Cambridge Literary Review*,
1.1 (Michaelmas 2010), pp. 141–47

*Fifty-Fifth Annual Report* (Cambridge: Jesus College Cambridge Society,
1959)

Fuller, Roy, ‘The Osmotic Sap’, *Times Literary Supplement* (6 May
1971), pp. 559–61

Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, *The Man-Made World; Or, Our Androcentric
Culture*, 3rd ed. (New York: Charlton Company, 1914).

‘glossy, adj.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2014),\
&lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/79186&gt; \[accessed 14 May 2014\]

Goddard, Louis, ‘Migration Patterns: Two Little Magazines of 1960–1962’,
*Textual Practice*,\
&lt;http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0950236X.2016.1188143&gt;
\[accessed 11 July 2014\]

—, ‘National and Private Identity in the Prose of J.H. Prynne’
(unpublished M.Phil. thesis, University of Cambridge, 2014)

—, ‘Not spooked’, *Times Literary Supplement* (11 December 2015), p. 17

Gombrich, Richard F., ‘British Higher Education Policy in the last
Twenty Years: The Murder of a Profession’ (January 2000),\
&lt;http://www.atm.damtp.cam.ac.uk/mcintyre/papers/LHCE/uk-higher-education.html&gt;
\[accessed 24 October 2014\]

Görtschacher, Wolfgang, *Little Magazine Profiles: The Little Magazines
in Great Britain, 1939–1993* (Salzburg: University of Salzburg, 1993)

Gye, Hugo, ‘Hammond to keep job’, *Varsity* (6 November 2008),\
&lt;http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/1077&gt; \[accessed 15 October 2015\]

Hall, John Matthew, *On Violence in the Work of J.H. Prynne* (Newcastle
upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014)

Hardt, Michael and Antonio Negri, *Empire* (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 2000), pp. 388–89

Harman, Graham, ‘Meillassoux’s arche-fossil is not an “argument”’,
*Object-Oriented Philosophy* (6 March 2014),\
&lt;https://doctorzamalek2.wordpress.com/2014/03/06/meillassouxs-archefossil-is-not-an-argument/&gt;
\[accessed 12 June 2015\]

Hegel, G.W.F., *Lectures on the History of Philosophy: Medieval and
Modern Philosophy*, trans. by E.S. Haldane and Frances H. Simson
(Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1995)

Heidegger, Martin, *Being and Time*, trans. by John Macquarrie and
Edward Robinson (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1962)

—, ‘Building Dwelling Thinking’, in *Poetry, Language, Thought*, trans.
by Alfred Hofstadter (New York: Harper and Row, 1971), pp. 145–161

‘Higher Education: Students at the Heart of the System’, *Department for
Business, Innovation & Skills* (June 2011),\
&lt;https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/31384/11–944-higher-education-students-at-heart-of-system.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 3 March 2014\]

Hilliard, Christopher, *English as a Vocation: The ‘Scrutiny’ Movement*
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012)

Horkheimer, Max and Theodor W. Adorno, *Dialectic of Enlightenment*, ed.
by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr, trans. by Edmund Jephcott (Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press, 2002)

‘Hysteria over population’, *The Times* (6 September 1967), p. 13

‘In the Movement’, *The Spectator* (30 September 1954), pp. 21–22

Isherwood, Christopher, *Lions and Shadows* (London: Methuen, 1953)

—, foreword to ‘The Railway Accident’, in Edward Upward, *The Railway
Accident and Other Stories* (London: Penguin, 1972), pp. 33–35

Ixer, Rob, Richard Bevins and Nick Pearce, ‘Stonehenge rhyolitic
bluestone sources and the application of zircon chemistry as a new tool
for provenancing rhyolitic lithics’, *Journal of Archaeological
Science*, 38.3 (March 2011), pp. 605–22

Jacobson, Dan, ‘You Muddy Fools’, *London Review of Books*, 24.2 (14
January 2002), pp. 3–14

James, William, *Some Problems of Philosophy: A Beginning of an
Introduction to Philosophy* (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press,
1996), p. 39

Jameson, Fredric, *Fables of Aggression: Wyndham Lewis, the Modernist as
Fascist* (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1979), p. 95

Jarvis, Simon, *Adorno: A Critical Introduction* (Cambridge: Polity
Press, 1998), p. 68)

—, ‘Quality and the non-identical in J.H. Prynne’s “Aristeas, in Seven
Years”’, *Parataxis*, 1 (1991), pp. 69–86

—, ‘Why rhyme pleases’, *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011), pp. 17–43

‘J.H. Prynne’, *The Poetry Foundation*,\
&lt;http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/jh-prynne&gt; \[accessed 15
December 2014\]

‘J. H. Prynne’, *Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia*, 3 July 2014, 07:56
UTC,\
&lt;http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=J.\_H.\_Prynne&oldid=615398780&gt;
\[accessed 15 December 2014\]

Johansson, Birgitta, *The Engineering of Being: An Ontological Approach
to J.H. Prynne* (Umeå: Acta Universitatis Umensis, 1997); Ryan Dobran,
‘The Difficult Style: A Study of the Poetry of J.H. Prynne’ (unpublished
doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 2013)

Jones, Frederick L., ed., *The Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley*, vol. 2
(Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1964)

Keery, James, ‘The Great Tradition’, *PN Review*, 23.6 (1997),\
&lt;http://www.pnreview.co.uk/cgi-bin/scribe?item\_id=35&gt; \[accessed
28 November 2014\]

Kenner, Hugh, ‘Wyndham Lewis: The Satirist as Barbarian’, *The Yearbook
of English Studies*, 14 (1984), pp. 264–75

Kim, Tae Chul, ‘F.R. Leavis, or the Function of Criticism under
Specialist Modernity’, *Journal of British and American Studies*, 10.1
(2004), pp. 81–112

King-Hele, Desmond, *Shelley: His Thought and Work* (London: Macmillan,
1960), p. 216

Klein, Scott W., ‘Introduction’, in Lewis, *Tarr*, pp. ix–xxix

Katko, Justin, ‘Relativistic Phytosophy: Towards a Commentary on “The
*Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts”’, *Glossator*, 2 (2010), pp. 245–94

Kraay, C.M., ‘Hoards, Small Change and the Origin of Coinage’, *Journal
of Hellenic Studies*, 84 (1964), pp. 76–91

Lacan, Jacques, *Écrits: A Selection*, trans. by Alan Sheridan (London:
Tavistock Publicatons, 1977)

Ladkin, Sam, ‘Glancing paintings and poems: figuration and abstraction
in Clark Coolidge’s *Polaroid* and Willem de Kooning’s *Excavation*’,
*Textual Practice*, 26 (2012), pp. 421–448

Latter, Alex, ‘“Essential news”: a history of *The English
Intelligencer*’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, Birkbeck College,
University of London, 2013)

—, *Late Modernism and ‘The English Intelligencer’* (London: Bloomsbury,
2015)

—, ‘“Scheming for the possible world”: J.H. Prynne’s *The White Stones*
and *The English Intelligencer*’, *Intercapillary Space*,\
&lt;http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/scheming-for-possible-world-j.html&gt;
\[accessed 10 October 2013\] (para. 2)

Leader, Zachary, ‘Introduction: Origins and Ambivalences’, in *The
Movement Reconsidered: Essays on Larkin, Amis, Gunn, Davie and Their
Contemporaries* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), pp. 1–15

—, *The Life of Kingsley Amis* (London: Random House, 2013), p. 284

‘leading edge, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2016),\
&lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/106611&gt; \[accessed 1 March 2016\]

Leavis, F.R., ‘Keynes, Spender and Currency-Values’, in *A Selection
from ‘Scrutiny’*, ed. by Leavis (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1968), vol. 1, p. 185–96

—, letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (21 May 1971), p. 593

—, *Mass Civilisation and Minority Culture* (Cambridge: The Minority
Press, 1930)

—, *New Bearings in English Poetry: A Study of the Contemporary
Situation* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1932)

—, ‘A Rejoinder’, *Scrutiny*, 4.2 (September 1935), pp. 185–87

—, ‘A Rejoinder’, *Scrutiny*, 19.4 (October 1953), pp. 321–28

—, ‘The Responsible Critic or The Function of Criticism at Any Time’,
*Scrutiny*, 19.3 (Spring 1953), pp. 162–84

—, ‘Retrospect of a Decade’, in *A Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 1,
pp. 175–79

—, ‘Revaluations (VIII): Shelley’, *Scrutiny*, 4.2 (September 1935),
pp. 158–80

—, ‘A Review’, *Scrutiny*, 4.1 (June 1935), pp. 96–100

—, *Scrutiny: A Retrospect* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1963)

—, ‘Under Which King, Bezonian?’, in *A Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*,
vol. 1, pp. 166–74

—, *Two Cultures?: The Significance of C.P. Snow*, ed. by Stefan Collini
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013)

— and Denys Thompson, *Culture and Environment: The Training of Critical
Awareness* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1933)

Leavis, Q.D., ‘The Background of Twentieth Century Letters’, in *A
Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 1, pp. 162–66

—, *Fiction and the Reading Public* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1932)

—, ‘Henry James’s Heiress: The Importance of Edith Wharton’, in *A
Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 2, pp. 124–36

Lewis, Wyndham, *The Caliph’s Design: Architects! Where is your
Vortex?*, ed. by Paul Edwards (Santa Barbara, CA: Black Sparrow Press,
1986), p. 65

—, ‘From the Prologue to the 1918 Egoist Press Edition’, in *Tarr*
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010), pp. 288–89

—, ‘Inferior Religions’, in *The Wild Body: ‘A Soldier of Humour’ and
Other Stories* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1928), pp. 233–43

—, ‘The Meaning of the Wild Body’, in *The Wild Body*, pp. 244–251

—, ‘Preface to the 1918 American Edition’, in *Tarr* (2010), pp. 285–88

—, *Tarr* (London: Egoist Press, 1918)

—, *Tarr* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1928)

—, *Time and Western Man*, ed. by Paul Edwards (Santa Rosa, CA: Black
Sparrow Press, 1993), p. 88

Lindsay, Jow, ‘Excerpt from An Open Letter to J.H. Prynne’, *QUID*, 17
(2006), pp. 35–39

‘The Literary Society’, *Fifty-Fifth Annual Report* (Cambridge: Jesus
College Society, 1959), pp. 60–61

‘Long Live the Vortex!’, *Blast*, 1 (1914), \[pp. 7–8\]

Lovelock, James, *A Rough Ride to the Future* (London: Allen Lane, 2014)

Luna, Joe and Jow Lindsay, eds., *Hix Eros: On the Late Poetry of J.H.
Prynne* (Brighton: Hi Zero and Sad Press, 2014)

Lynd, Robert S. and Helen Merrell, *Middletown: A Study in American
Culture* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company, 1929)

Lytle Shaw, *Frank O’Hara: The Poetics of Coterie* (Iowa City:
University of Iowa Press, 2006)

MacKillop, Ian, *F.R. Leavis: A Life in Criticism* (London: Allen Lane),
p. 152

Mallon, Thomas, ‘The Underreachers’, *Contemporary Literature*, 22.2
(Spring 1981), pp. 243–47

‘Manifesto—I’, *Blast*, 1, pp. 11–28

‘Manifesto—II’, *Blast*, 1, pp. 30–43

Marriott, D.S., ‘An Introduction to the Poetry of J.H. Prynne
(1962–1977)’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Sussex, 1993)

Marwick, Arthur, *The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France,
Italy and the United States, c. 1958–c. 1974* (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1998), p. 7

Marx, Karl, *Capital*, 3rd vol., ed. by Friedrich Engels, in
*Marx/Engels Collected Works*, 37th vol. (New York: International
Publishers, 1998)

—, ‘Comments on James Mill, *Éléments d’économie politique*’, trans. by
Clemens Dutt, in Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Collected Works, Volume 3:
Marx and Engels, 1843–1844* (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1975),
pp. 211–28

—, *Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844*, trans. by Martin
Mulligan (Moscow: Progress, 1959)

Materer, Timothy, *Vortex: Pound, Eliot, and Lewis* (London: Cornell
University Press, 1979)

Matthews, David, *Memories of F.R. Leavis* (Bishopstone: Edgeways Books,
2010)

Maud, Ralph, *Charles Olson’s Reading: A Biography* (Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1996)

May, John F., *World Population Policies: Their Origin, Evolution, and
Impact* (Berlin: Springer, 2012)

McGann, Jerome, review, *Modern Philology*, 66.3 (February 1969),
pp. 280–83

Meillassoux, Quentin, *After Finitude*, trans. by Ray Brassier (London:
Continuum, 2008)

—, ‘Time without Becoming’, conference paper presented at Middlesex
University (8 May 2008),\
&lt;https://speculativeheresy.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/3729-time\_without\_becoming.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 12 June 2015\]

Mellors, Anthony, *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne*
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2005)

—, ‘Poetic Space and the Late Modernist Text: The Theory and Context of
J.H. Prynne’s Writings from 1960–1974’ (unpublished doctoral thesis,
University of Oxford, 1993)

Middleton, Peter, *Distant Reading: Performance, Readership and
Consumption in Contemporary Poetry* (Tuscaloosa, AL: University of
Alabama Press, 2005)

Mill, John Stuart, ‘Tennyson’s Poems’, in *The Collected Works of John
Stuart Mill, Volume 1 – Autobiography and Literary Essays*, ed. by John
M. Robson (London: Routledge, 2013), pp. 395–418

Miller, David and Richard Price, *British Poetry Magazines,
pp. 1914–2000* (London: British Library, 2006)

Milne, Drew, ‘The Art of Wit and the Cambridge Science Park’, in
*Contemporary Poetry and Contemporary Science*, ed. by Robert Crawford
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), pp. 170–87

*Modernist Magazines Project*,\
&lt;http://www.modernistmagazines.com/&gt; \[accessed 15 January 2015\]

Moody, A. David, *Ezra Pound: Poet: A Portrait of the Man and His Work*,
3 vols (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009–2015)

Morris, L.F., *A History of St Dunstan’s College* (London: St Dunstan’s
College, 1970)

Morrison, Blake, *The Movement: English Poetry and Fiction of the 1950s*
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1980)

‘motive, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2015),\
&lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/122712&gt; \[accessed 18 March 2015\]

Mottram, Eric, ‘The British Poetry Revival 1960–1975’, in *New British
Poetries: The Scope of the Possible*, ed. by Robert Hampson and Peter
Barry (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993), pp. 15–50

Muhly, James D., ‘Sources of Tin and the Beginnings of Bronze
Metallurgy’, *American Journal of Archaeology*, 89.2 (April 1985),
pp. 275–91

Mulhern, Francis, *The Moment of ‘Scrutiny’* (London: New Left Books,
1979)

Murdoch, Iris, ‘The Idea of Perfection’, *Yale Review*, 53.3 (Spring
1964), pp. 342–80

Nealon, Chris, ‘The Prynne Reflex’, *The Claudius App*, 4 (2013),\
&lt;http://theclaudiusapp.com/4-nealon.html&gt; \[accessed 10 October
2013\]

Needham, Joseph, ‘Chemical Heterogony and the Ground-Plan of Animal
Growth’, *Biological Reviews*, 9.1 (January 1934), pp. 79–109

Nicholas Royle, *Veering: A Theory of Literature* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2011)

Noel-Tod, Jeremy, ‘Prynne, J. H. (Jeremy Halvard)’, in *The Oxford
Companion to Modern Poetry in English*, 2nd edn, ed. by Noel-Tod
(Oxford: Oxford University Press),\
&lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780199640256.001.0001/acref-9780199640256-e-961&gt;
\[accessed 15 December 2014\]

Notices, in *Certain Prose*, 1:11 \[173\], pp. 24–25

Noyes, Hugh, ‘Abortion Bill over Last Commons Hurdles: Hint on
Conscience Clause’, *The Times* (15 July 1967), p. 2

Nye, Edward, *Literary and Linguistic Theories in Eighteenth-Century
France: From ‘Nuances’ to ‘Impertinence’* (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000)

‘nympholepsy, n.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2015),\
&lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/129422&gt; \[accessed 28 April 2015\]

Oliver, Douglas, *The Harmless Building* (London: Ferry Press and
Grosseteste Review Books, 1973)

—, *Three Variations on the Theme of Harm* (London: Paladin, 1990)

Ollard, Elizabeth, ‘The British Academy 1902–2002: Support for
Research’, *British Academy*,\
&lt;http://www.britac.ac.uk/pubs/src/ba-history/research.cfm&gt;
\[accessed 24 October 2014\]

Olson, Charles, ‘The Distances’, in *The Collected Poems of Charles
Olson*, ed. by George F. Butterick (Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1987), pp. 491–92

—, ‘Letter to Elaine Feinstein’, in *Collected Prose*, ed. by Donald
Allen and Benjamin Friedlander (Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press, 1997), pp. 250–52

—, ‘A Plantation—A Beginning’, *Prospect*, 4 (Spring 1960), pp. 21–23

—, ‘Projective Verse’, in *Collected Prose*, pp. 239–49

—, *The Maximus Poems / 1–10* (Highlands, NC: Jargon Society, 1953)

—, *The Maximus Poems / 11–22* (Highlands, NC: Jargon Society, 1956)

—, ‘Maximus to Gloucester’, *Prospect*, 1 (Summer 1959), pp. 19–20

— and Ezra Pound, *An Encounter at St. Elizabeth’s*, ed. by Catherine
Seelye (New York: Grossman, 1975)

Orr, Peter, ed., *The Poet Speaks: Interviews with Contemporary Poets*
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966)

*The Paris Review Interviews*, vol. 1 (New York: Picador, 2006)

Patterson, Ian, ‘“the medium itself, rabbit by proxy”: some thoughts
about reading J.H. Prynne’, in *Poets on Writing, pp. 1970–1991*
(London: Macmillan, 1992), pp. 234–46

Pattison, Reitha, ‘J.H. Prynne’s “The Corn Burned By Syrius”’,
*Glossator*, 2 (2010), pp. 89–114

‘Papers Relating to “Players of Shakespeare”’, *Archives Hub*,\
&lt;http://archiveshub.ac.uk/data/gb2188-dsh04&gt; \[accessed 16
November 2014\]

Pound, Ezra, ‘Cavalcanti’, in *Literary Essays of Ezra Pound*, ed. by
T.S. Eliot (London: Faber and Faber, 1954), pp. 149–200

—, ‘A Few Don’ts by an Imagiste’, *Poetry* (March 1913), pp. 200–06

—, ‘Guido’s Relations’, *The Dial*, 86 (July 1929), 559–68

—, *Hugh Selwyn Mauberley* (London: The Ovid Press, 1920), p. 12

—, ‘In a Station of the Metro’, *Poetry* (April 1913), p. 12

—, ‘A Pact’, *Poetry* (April 1913), pp. 11–12

—, *Sonnets and Ballate of Guido Cavalcanti* (London: Stephen Swift and
Co., 1912)

—, ‘XLV’, in *The Cantos of Ezra Pound* (New York: New Directions,
1996), pp. 229–30

Powell, Neil, ‘Davie, Donald Alfred (1922–1995)’, *Oxford Dictionary of
National Biography* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004),\
&lt;http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/60078&gt; \[accessed 6
November 2014\]

Press, John, *Rule and Energy: Trends in British Poetry Since the Second
World War* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1963)

Priestman, Martin, *The Poetry of Erasmus Darwin: Enlightened Spaces,
Romantic Times* (London: Routledge, 2016)

Pritchett, Ben and Decca Muldowney, ‘Student activism then and now: an
interview with Ian Patterson’, *The Great Unrest*, (13 January 2011),\
&lt;http://thegreatunrest.wordpress.com/2011/01/13/ian-patterson-interview/&gt;
\[accessed 15 December 2014\]

‘Prynne, J.H.’, in *The Concise Oxford Companion to English Literature*,
4th edn, ed. by Dinah Birch and Katy Hooper (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2012), p. 574

‘Prynne, J. H. (Jeremy Halvard)’, in *The Oxford Companion to English
Literature*, 7th edn, ed. by Dinah Birch (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2009),\
&lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780192806871.001.0001/acref-9780192806871-e-9225&gt;
\[accessed 15 December 2014\]

Prynne, J.H. and Keston Sutherland, ‘Introduction to Prynne’s Poems in
Chinese’, *Cambridge Quarterly*, 41.1 (2012), pp. 197–207

Purves, Robin, ‘Commentary on J.H. Prynne’s “Thoughts on the Esterházy
Court Uniform”’, *Glossator*, 2 (2010), pp. 79–88

Ransome, John Crowe, ‘A Poem Nearly Anonymous’, *The American Review*
(May 1933), pp. 179–203

Rathmell, J.C.A., ‘Paradigms for a Wider Concern’, *The Cambridge
Review* (19 January 1963), pp. 193–94

Reeve, N.H. and Richard Kerridge, *Nearly Too Much: The Poetry of J.H.
Prynne* (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 1995)

Reuck, A.V.S. de and Julie Knight, eds, *Touch, Heat and Pain* (London:
J. & A. Churchill, 1966)

Rider, Alistair, ‘The “Curve over the Crest of the Hill”: Carl Andre and
Richard Long’, in *Anglo-American Exchange in Postwar Sculpture,
pp. 1945–1975*, ed. by Rebecca Peabody (Los Angeles, CA: Getty
Publications, 2011), pp. 133–47

Riley, Peter, ‘Peter Riley – Excerpts from a Notebook’, in *Certain
Prose*, 2:3 \[339–40\], pp. 118–20

—, ‘Working Notes on British Prehistory, or Archaeological Guesswork
One’, in *Certain Prose*., 1:14 (supplement) \[234–47\], pp. 47–73

Rindler, W., ‘Visual Horizons in World Models’, *Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society*, 6 (1956), pp. 662–77

‘Robbins Report: Notice by the Council of the Senate’, *Cambridge
University Reporter* (19 February 1964), pp. 986–988

‘Roll Call’, in *Certain Prose*., 1:15 \[266\], pp. 78–79

Roosa, Robert V., ‘Judging the New Liquidity Plan’, *The Banker*,
117.499 (September 1967), p. 756

Royle, Nicholas, *Veering: A Theory of Literature* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press, 2011)

Rumsey, Lacy, ‘The Obstinate reader: Prynne, prosody and degrees of
engagement’, *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011), pp. 44–66 (pp. 48–49)

Rustin, Michael, ‘Revisiting the *May Day Manifesto* of 1967–68’, in
*May Day Manifesto 1967–68*, ed. by Raymond Williams (London: Lawrence &
Wishart, 2013), pp. vi–xxi

Sankar, Nandini Ramesh, ‘Poetics of Difficulty in Postmodern Poetry’
(unpublished doctoral thesis, Cornell University, 2012)

Scarry, Elaine, *The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the World*
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985)

Schedule, *Radio Times* (6 December 1962), p. 49

Schedule, *Radio Times* (13 December 1962), p. 13

Schmidt, Michael, ‘Elaine Feinstein in Conversation’, *PN Review*, 24.2
(December 1997), pp. 36–41

‘Securing a Sustainable Future for Higher Education’ (12 October 2010),\
&lt;https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment\_data/file/31999/10–1208-securing-sustainable-higher-education-browne-report.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 3 March 2014\]

Sheldrake, Rupert, *A New Science of Life: The Hypothesis of Formative
Causation* (Los Angeles, CA: J.P. Tarcher, 1981)

Shelley, Percy Bysshe, *A Philosophical View of Reform* (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1920)

Solomon, Samuel, ‘Reproducing the Line: 1970s Innovative Poetry and
Socialist-Feminism in the UK’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University
of Southern California, 2012)

Spiegelberg, Herbert, *The Phenomenological Movement* (The Hague:
Martinus Nijhoff, 1959)

Stansky, Peter, *Edward Upward: Art and Life* (London: Enitharmon, 2016)

Steele, Laura, ‘Comedy and the Conceptual in Douglas Oliver’s *The
Harmless Building*’, *Intercapillary Space* (September 2006),\
&lt;http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2006/09/comedy-and-conceptual-in- douglas.html&gt;
\[accessed 27 April 2015\]

Stevens, Wallace, ‘Prologues to What is Possible’, *The Hudson Review*,
5.3 (Autumn 1952), pp. 330–31

—, ‘The World as Meditation’, *The Hudson Review*, 5.3, p. 334

Sutherland, Keston, ‘Introduction: “Prynne’s late work?”’, in *Hix Eros:
On the Late Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, pp. 9–13

—, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University
of Cambridge, 2004)

—, ‘*Sub Songs* versus the subject: Critical variations on a distinction
between Prynne and Hegel’, in *Hix Eros: On the Late Poetry of J.H.
Prynne*, pp. 123–141

Thatcher, Margaret, ‘Speech at Lord Mayor’s Banquet’, *Margaret Thatcher
Foundation* (10 November 1986),\
&lt;http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/106512&gt; \[accessed 24
October 2014\]

Tomlinson, Charles, ‘The Art of Poetry No. 78’, interviewed by Willard
Spiegelman, *The Paris Review*, 149 (Winter 1998),\
&lt;http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/1033/the-art-of-poetry-no-78-charles-tomlinson&gt;
\[accessed 17 November 2014\]

—, ‘The Middlebrow Muse’, *Essays in Criticism*, 7.2 (April 1957),
pp. 208–17

Tompkins, Peter and Christopher Bird, *The Secret Life of Plants* (New
York: Harper & Row, 1973), p. 12

—, ‘Love among the cabbages’, *Harper’s Magazine* (November 1972),
pp. 90–92, pp. 94–96

Trotter, David, *The Making of the Reader: Language and Subjectivity in
Modern American, English and Irish Poetry* (London: Macmillan, 1984)

Upward, Edward, *No Home But the Struggle*, ed. by David Allinson,
*Edward Upward*,\
&lt;http://www.edwardupward.info/pdfs/No\_Home\_But\_the\_Struggle.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 5 May 2015\]

—, ‘The Railway Accident’, in *The Railway Accident*, pp. 33–84

—, *The Rotten Elements*, ed. by David Allinson, *Edward Upward*,\
&lt;http://www.edwardupward.info/pdfs/The\_Rotten\_Elements.pdf&gt;
\[accessed 27 November 2015\]

—, ‘Statement for the Literature/Sociology Conference on “1936” at Essex
University, July 1978’, *Edward Upward*,\
&lt;http://www.edwardupward.info/pdfs/Statement.pdf&gt; \[accessed 5 May
2015\]

Vinen, Richard, *National Service: Conscription in Britain,
pp. 1945–1963* (London: Allen Lane, 2014)

‘Watercolour’, *Tate*,\
&lt;http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/watercolour&gt;
\[accessed 2 November 2014\]

Walker, Alan, *Edward Upward: A Bibliography* (London: Enitharmon Press,
2000)

Watkins, Alan, ‘About-turn on welfare’, *The Spectator* (22 June 1967),
p. 3–4

Wheale, Nigel, ‘Cambridge School, The’, in *The Oxford Companion to
Modern Poetry in English*, 2nd edn,\
&lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780199640256.001.0001/acref-9780199640256-e-1383&gt;
\[accessed 15 December 2014\]

Wild, John, ‘Contemporary Phenomenology and the Problem of Existence’,
*Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, 20.2 (December 1959),
pp. 166–180

Williams, Raymond, ‘Introduction’, in *Keywords*, rev. edn (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1985), pp. 11–26

—, ‘Our Debt to Dr. Leavis’, *Critical Quarterly*, 1.3 (September 1959),
pp. 245–56

Williams, William Carlos, ‘Introduction to *The Wedge*’, in *Selected
Essays* (New York: Random House, 1954), p. 256

Wilson, Ross, *Shelley and the Apprehension of Life* (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2013), p. 25

‘Women MPs & parliamentary candidates since 1945’, *UK Political Info*,\
&lt;http://www.ukpolitical.info/FemaleMPs.htm&gt; \[accessed 2 February
2016\] \newpage

Appendix (Figures)
==================

\newpage
\pagenumbering{gobble}

![Prynne’s poetry collections, linked to the magazines in which they
were first published (in whole or in part)](figs/mags.png){#fig:mags}

\newpage
![The argument of ‘A Note on Metal’](figs/anm.png){#fig:anm}

![Appearances of ‘man’ per 1,000 lines in *Force of Circumstance* (1962)
and *Poems* (2005)](figs/man.png){#fig:man}

[^1]: J.H. Prynne, ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, *Chicago Review*, 58.1
    (Summer 2013), 89–105 (p. 93).

[^2]: Keston Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’ (unpublished
    doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge, 2004), p. 111. The
    academic and poetic relationship between Davie and Prynne will be
    discussed at length in Chapter 1 of the present thesis.

[^3]: N.R. Burrell, ‘The Language of Silence is no Paradox: Enervation &
    Renewal in the Poetry of J.H. Prynne’ (unpublished doctoral thesis,
    American University of London, 1993); D.S. Marriott, ‘An
    Introduction to the Poetry of J.H. Prynne (1962–1977)’ (unpublished
    doctoral thesis, University of Sussex, 1993); Anthony Mellors,
    ‘Poetic Space and the Late Modernist Text: The Theory and Context of
    J.H. Prynne’s Writings from 1960–1974’ (unpublished doctoral thesis,
    University of Oxford, 1993); Rachel Campbell-Johnston, ‘The
    Difficult Matter; A Reading of the Poetry of J.H. Prynne’
    (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Edinburgh, 1994);
    Birgitta Johansson, *The Engineering of Being: An Ontological
    Approach to J.H. Prynne* (Umeå: Acta Universitatis Umensis, 1997);
    Ryan Dobran, ‘The Difficult Style: A Study of the Poetry of J.H.
    Prynne’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Cambridge,
    2013); Matthew Hall, *On Violence in the Work of J.H. Prynne*
    (Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014).

[^4]: This is not to suggest that ‘theory-driven’ scholarship is not a
    necessary and valuable contribution to the steadily growing corpus
    of work on Prynne; merely that its continued proliferation, at the
    expense of more basic historical research, risks making that corpus
    seem distinctly lopsided, and perhaps even contributes to the
    continued marginalisation of Prynne within mainstream literary
    history by rendering much of the secondary literature inaccessible
    to readers not well-versed in the theoretical issues surrounding
    avant-garde contemporary poetry. Whether Prynne’s marginalisation
    within mainstream literary history is considered a problem by
    scholars of his work is another matter.

[^5]: Following the model of the fourth chapter of Sutherland’s ‘J.H.
    Prynne and Philology’, Matthew Hall’s recent doctoral thesis on
    violence in Prynne’s work includes some exemplary readings of the
    poetry in relation to large-scale national and global political
    history, but—with some exceptions, such as the connection of
    *Acrylic Tips* to the work of John Kinsella (Hall, pp. 130–32)—is
    less concerned with the local history of the work’s production. Ryan
    Dobran’s thesis makes full use of both modes, dealing with subjects
    ranging from the election of Ted Heath to Prynne’s relationships
    with Laurence Picken, Joseph Needham, Francis Crick and Rupert
    Sheldrake, but is less straightforwardly historical than Latter’s
    work, being organised around the concept of ‘difficulty’.

[^6]: A characteristic example is Ian Brinton, ‘“A common meeting
    point”: Andrew Crozier’s Involvement with *The English
    Intelligencer* and *The Wivenhoe Park Review*’, *PN Review*, 38.3
    (2012), pp. 54–56, which includes detailed discussion of Prynne’s
    role as editor of *Prospect* and uses archival material to show the
    importance accorded by Prynne to the ordering of his poems in
    publication.

[^7]: Prynne, ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, *Chicago Review*, 55.1
    (November 2010), 126–57 (p. 130). This position has led to an
    erroneous depiction of Prynne in parts of the mainstream press as a
    sort of poetic recluse. In a 2014 discussion with Nicholas Royle,
    Prynne acknowledged and even attempted to dispel this image,
    admitting that it was ‘time to relax’ about biographical questions
    (Prynne, ‘A Dialogue with Nicholas Royle’ \[seminar, University of
    Sussex, 11 March 2014\]). Importantly, Prynne has in his own
    scholarship and teaching made little effort to avoid comparisons
    between life and work. His notes for undergraduates on Ezra Pound,
    for example, begin with a three-page biographical chronology,
    complete with two separate references for further material about
    Pound’s life (Prynne, ‘Reading Pound: Background’, *Gonville and
    Caius College*,
    &lt;http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk/students/study/english/pound/pound0.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 8 January 2016\].

[^8]: Prynne admits this himself, albeit negatively, in ‘The Poet’s
    Imaginary’, claiming that ‘above all other classes of writing, a
    poem is least likely to ensue from specific purposes already
    motivating its occasion’ (Prynne, ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, p. 89).

[^9]: Nandini Ramesh Sankar, ‘Poetics of Difficulty in Postmodern
    Poetry’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, Cornell University, 2012).

[^10]: Simon Jarvis, ‘Why rhyme pleases’, *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011),
    17–43 (p. 21).

[^11]: Jarvis, ‘Quality and the non-identical in J.H. Prynne’s
    “Aristeas, in Seven Years”’, *Parataxis*, 1 (1991), 69–86 (p. 83);
    Robin Purves, ‘Commentary on J.H. Prynne’s “Thoughts on the
    Esterházy Court Uniform”’, *Glossator*, 2 (2010), 79–88 (pp. 80–81);
    Reitha Pattison, ‘J.H. Prynne’s “The Corn Burned By Syrius”’,
    *ibid*., 89–114 (pp. 103–14); Alex Latter, ‘“Scheming for the
    possible world”: J.H. Prynne’s *The White Stones* and *The English
    Intelligencer*’, *Intercapillary Space*,
    &lt;http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/scheming-for-possible-world-j.html&gt;
    \[accessed 10 October 2013\] (para. 2); Nicholas Royle, *Veering: A
    Theory of Literature* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2011),
    p. 51 n. 42; Seeta Chaganti, ‘Vestigial Signs: Inscription,
    Performance, and *The Dream of the Rood*’, *PMLA*, 125 (2010),
    pp. 48–72; C.D. Blanton, ‘Nominal Devolutions: Poetic Substance and
    the Critique of Political Economy’, *Yale Journal of Criticism*, 13
    (2000), pp. 129–51.

[^12]: Jow Lindsay, ‘Excerpt from An Open Letter to J.H. Prynne’,
    *QUID*, 17 (2006), pp. 35–39; Justin Katko, ‘Relativistic
    Phytosophy: Towards a Commentary on “The *Plant Time Manifold*
    Transcripts”’, *Glossator*, 2 (2010), pp. 245–94; Gerald Bruns,
    ‘Dialectrics; or, Turmoil & Contradiction: A Reading of J. H.
    Prynne’s *Kazoo Dreamboats*’, *Chicago Review*, 57.3/4 (Winter
    2013), pp. 54–70.

[^13]: Charles Bernstein, ‘Introduction’, in *Close Listening: Poetry
    and the Performed Word*, ed. by Bernstein (Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 1998), 3–26 (p. 17); Edward Nye, *Literary and Linguistic
    Theories in Eighteenth-Century France: From ‘Nuances’ to
    ‘Impertinence’* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), pp. 174–75;
    Derek Attridge, *Moving Words: Forms of English Poetry* (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 89–91; Lytle Shaw, *Frank
    O’Hara: The Poetics of Coterie* (Iowa City: University of Iowa
    Press, 2006), pp. 179–83; Sam Ladkin, ‘Glancing paintings and poems:
    figuration and abstraction in Clark Coolidge’s *Polaroid* and Willem
    de Kooning’s *Excavation*’, *Textual Practice*, 26 (2012), 421–448
    (pp. 434–35); Peter Middleton, *Distant Reading: Performance,
    Readership and Consumption in Contemporary Poetry* (Tuscaloosa, AL:
    University of Alabama Press, 2005), p. 182.

[^14]: Attridge, pp. 85–91; Lacy Rumsey, ‘The Obstinate reader: Prynne,
    prosody and degrees of engagement’, *Thinking Verse*, 1 (2011),
    44–66 (pp. 48–49).

[^15]: Chris Nealon, ‘The Prynne Reflex’, *The Claudius App*, 4 (2013),
    &lt;http://theclaudiusapp.com/4-nealon.html&gt; \[accessed 10
    October 2013\].

[^16]: Charles Olson and Ezra Pound, *An Encounter at St. Elizabeth’s*,
    ed. by Catherine Seelye (New York: Grossman, 1975), p. 81.

[^17]: As Marwick points out, ‘many of the new trends of the sixties
    continued throughout the seventies, and right on to today’ (Arthur
    Marwick, *The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy
    and the United States, c. 1958–c. 1974* \[Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 1998\], p. 7).

[^18]: J.H. Prynne, ‘Stille (nach Thomas Hood)’, *Six* (1955), p. 11.

[^19]: Other key publications of that year include the first edition of
    Donald Davie’s *Articulate Energy* and Charles Tomlinson’s first
    mature collection, *The Necklace*.

[^20]: Anthony Mellors, *Late Modernist Poetics: From Pound to Prynne*
    (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2005), p. 2.

[^21]: Bernard Dubourg, *Poèmes de Cuisine* (Damazan: privately printed,
    1975); *Chansons à la Journée-Lumière* (Damazan: privately printed,
    1975); *Lézard de Feu* (Damazan: privately printed, 1975).

[^22]: Louis Goddard, ‘National and Private Identity in the Prose of
    J.H. Prynne’ (unpublished M.Phil. thesis, University of Cambridge,
    2013).

[^23]: Jeremy Noel-Tod, ‘Prynne, J. H. (Jeremy Halvard)’, in *The Oxford
    Companion to Modern Poetry*, 2nd edn, ed. by Ian Hamilton and Jeremy
    Noel-Tod (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013),
    &lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com\slash view\slash 10.1093\slash acref\slash 9780199640256.001.0001\slash acref-9780199640256-e-961&gt;
    \[accessed 15 December 2014\]; ‘Prynne, J. H. (Jeremy Halvard)’, in
    *The Oxford Companion to English Literature*, 7th edn, ed. by Dinah
    Birch (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009),
    &lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com\slash view\slash 10.1093\slash acref\slash 9780192806871.001.0001\slash acref-9780192806871-e-9225&gt;
    \[accessed 15 December 2014\]; ‘J.H. Prynne’, *The Poetry
    Foundation*, &lt;http://www.poetryfoundation.org/bio/jh-prynne&gt;
    \[accessed 15 December 2014\]; ‘J. H. Prynne’, *Wikipedia, The Free
    Encyclopedia*, 3 July 2014, 07:56 UTC,
    &lt;http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=J.\_H.\_Prynne&oldid=615398780&gt;
    \[accessed 15 December 2014\].

[^24]: ‘Prynne, J.H.’, in *The Concise Oxford Companion to English
    Literature*, 4th edn, ed. by Dinah Birch and Katy Hooper (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2012), p. 574.

[^25]: Eric Mottram, ‘The British Poetry Revival 1960–1975’, in *New
    British Poetries: The Scope of the Possible*, ed. by Robert Hampson
    and Peter Barry (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1993),
    pp. 15–50.

[^26]: J.H. Prynne, *Poems*, 3rd edn (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 2015), referrred
    to hereafter as *Poems*.

[^27]: Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, p. 238; Ian Patterson,
    ‘“the medium itself, rabbit by proxy”: some thoughts about reading
    J.H. Prynne’, in *Poets on Writing, 1970–1991* (London: Macmillan,
    1992), 234–46 (p. 237). This conception has recently been confirmed
    by Prynne himself, who has noted that ‘*Brass* was a distinct break
    with its precursor practise’ (Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry No. 101’,
    interviewed by Jeff Dolven and Joshua Kotin, *The Paris Review*, 218
    \[Fall 2016\], 174–207 \[p. 191\]).

[^28]: Arguing against Anthony Mellors, Sutherland takes a version of
    the latter position, further disagreeing with Reeve and Kerridge
    over the precise character of the break: ‘It is in my view
    misleading to speak of “changes … introduced” by Prynne as if these
    were calculated reforms. It is also misleading to suggest that these
    changes were merely in “poetic manner” \[…\] rather than in Prynne’s
    convictions and his struggle to hold on to them’ (Sutherland, ‘J.H.
    Prynne and Philology’, p. 175, n. 329). Davie, for his part, seems
    to locate a break somewhere within the pages of *Brass*; having
    written confidently about much of *The White Stones*, he claims in
    1973 that ‘The Ideal Star-Fighter’ is ‘the only one of \[Prynne’s\]
    recent poems which I think I understand’ (Donald Davie, *Thomas
    Hardy and British Poetry* \[London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973\],
    pp. 177–78).

[^29]: *Hix Eros: On the Late Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, ed. by Joe Luna
    and Jow Lindsay Walton (Brighton: Hi Zero and Sad Press, 2014).

[^30]: Steve Clark, ‘Prynne and the Movement’, *Jacket*, 24 (November
    2003), &lt;http://jacketmagazine.com/24/clark-s.html&gt; \[accessed
    27 November 2014\].

[^31]: J.H. Prynne, ‘A Dialogue with Nicholas Royle’ (seminar,
    University of Sussex, 11 March 2014).

[^32]: By contrast, Prynne’s correspondence with Tomlinson is only
    partly represented by the small collection at the University of
    Texas’s Harry Ransom Center, with at least some letters from Prynne
    remaining in private possession.

[^33]: It would be instructive to make a detailed comparison of Prynne’s
    letters to Olson and Dorn with those to Peter Riley, who for much of
    the correspondence was living in the same city. It is of course
    likely that physical distance, as well as necessitating the conduct
    of a relationship through correspondence, fundamentally changes the
    nature of that relationship, with potential consequences in terms of
    influence and relevance to poetic work.

[^34]: Davie, *Ezra Pound: Poet as Sculptor* (Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, 1964), p. vi. In all the various collections of Davie’s
    papers, the only clearly identified material relating to Prynne is a
    single 1973 letter held at Yale University’s Beinecke Rare Book and
    Manuscript Library.

[^35]: Neil Powell, ‘Davie, Donald Alfred (1922–1995)’, *Oxford
    Dictionary of National Biography* (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    2004), &lt;http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/60078&gt;
    \[accessed 6 November 2014\].

[^36]: Alex Latter, ‘“Essential news”: a history of *The English
    Intelligencer*’ (unpublished doctoral thesis, Birkbeck College,
    University of London, 2013), pp. 100–01. Latter attributes this
    story to Peter Riley and notes that it has been corroborated by Rod
    Mengham (email to the author, 2 February 2014). Though Prynne took
    his scholarship examination in 1954, winning an exhibition, his
    progression from sixth form to university was interrupted by
    National Service, which he spent primarily with the 3rd The King’s
    Own Hussars in Iserlohn, Germany. As well as Langley, he was a
    contemporary on the Jesus English course of A.C. Spearing, J.C.A.
    Rathmell and Tony Tanner, all of whom would subsequently win
    research fellowships at other Cambridge colleges and go on to
    distinguished academic careers.

[^37]: Donald Davie, *Articulate Energy: An Inquiry into the Syntax of
    English Poetry* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1976), p. ix.

[^38]: Davie, *Purity of Diction in English Verse* (London: Chatto &
    Windus, 1952), p. 2.

[^39]: Davie, *Articulate Energy*, p. ix. In fairness, Davie is
    referring here not to his own actual tendencies, but to what he felt
    was expected by those ‘who were kind enough to read the two books
    one after the other, and to read my poems too’. His later sympathies
    with the modernist project are well-known.

[^40]: ‘In the Movement’, *The Spectator* (30 September 1954),
    pp. 21–22.

[^41]: Charles Tomlinson, ‘The Middlebrow Muse’, *Essays in Criticism*,
    7.2 (April 1957), 208–17 (p. 213).

[^42]: Davie, ‘Remembering the Movement’, in *The Poet in the Imaginary
    Museum: Essays of Two Decades*, ed. by Barry Alpert (Manchester:
    Carcanet, 1977), pp. 72–75.

[^43]: Davie, *Events & Wisdoms* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1964),
    \[dustjacket\]. Despite being published by the Marvell Press,
    Davie’s 1959 *The Forests of Lithuania*, a version of *Pan Tadeusz*,
    was also decidedly un-Movement.

[^44]: Davie, ‘Housekeeping’, in *Collected Poems* (Manchester:
    Carcanet, 1990), p. 104.

[^45]: Richard Vinen, *National Service: Conscription in Britain,
    1945–1963* (London: Allen Lane, 2014), p. 156.

[^46]: Davie, ‘A Reading of His Poems’ (reading, University of
    Cincinnati, 29 March 1963),
    &lt;http://drc.libraries.uc.edu\slash bitstream\slash handle\slash 2374.UC\slash 696768\slash Elliston\_Donald\_Davie\_03–29–63\_A\_Track\_07.mp3?sequence=15&gt;
    \[accessed 16 December 2014\].

[^47]: Davie, *The Poems of Doctor Zhivago* (Manchester: Manchester
    University Press, 1965).

[^48]: Davie, ‘A Reading of His Poems’.

[^49]: Davie, ‘NOVEMBER 14th, 1958’. Full references for all archival
    materials cited in this thesis, including letters, are provided
    chronologically by name in the bibliography.

[^50]: Prynne’s use of underlining in letters, both for titles and for
    emphasis, has been standardised to italics throughout this thesis.

[^51]: Prynne to Cid Corman, 19 November 1961. It is worth noting that
    *Prospect* did not, in fact, carry a review, which would in any case
    have seemed irrelevant by the time the magazine finally appeared in
    1964.

[^52]: Prynne, ‘from a letter’, *Mica*, 5 (Winter 1962), 2–3, 28
    \[p. 3\]). ‘Muscle’ is not always a negative term, however—writing
    to Dorn having just composed ‘The Wound, Day and Night’, Prynne
    claims that ‘I begin to feel like a muscle-man, and the relief of
    *for the first time* some confidence in the profession’ (Prynne to
    Dorn, 26 January 1966). In another letter to Dorn from 1964, he
    writes admiringly of the ‘muscular ease’ of the Australian novelist
    Patrick White’s prose (Prynne to Dorn, 21 December 1964).

[^53]: Davie, *Collected Poems, 1950–1970* (London: Routledge & Kegan
    Paul, 1972), p. 303.

[^54]: Davie, ‘A Letter to Curtis Bradford’, in *Collected Poems*
    (Manchester: Carcanet, 1990), 98–99 (p. 99).

[^55]: Davie, ‘For Doreen. A Voice from the Garden’, in *ibid*.,
    pp. 99–100 (p. 100).

[^56]: Whatever his antipathy towards the sequence in 1961, Prynne did
    at least send a copy to Dorn, suggesting a certain level of interest
    (Dorn to Olson, 3 March 1965).

[^57]: Prynne to Ed Dorn, 29 April 1962. In an interesting slip, Prynne
    refers to *The Newly Fallen* as ‘*For the Unfallen*’, the title of a
    1959 collection by Geoffrey Hill.

[^58]: ‘Elections to Fellowships’, *The Caian* (Lent 1963), p. 33.
    Latter, *Late Modernism and ‘The English Intelligencer’* (London:
    Bloomsbury, 2015), p. 239, n. 4.

[^59]: Davie, ‘Remembering the Movement’, p. 74.

[^60]: Prynne to Dorn, 9 July 1962.

[^61]: Davie, ‘Remembering the Movement’, p. 72.

[^62]: Prynne, ‘A Gold Ring Called Reluctance’, in *Poems* (Tarset:
    Bloodaxe, 2015), 21–23 (p. 22).

[^63]: *Ibid*., p. 23; John Press, *Rule and Energy: Trends in British
    Poetry Since the Second World War* (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    1963), p. 47. A more apt ancestor to Prynne’s technique can be found
    in the heavy irony of Pound’s *Hugh Selwyn Mauberley*; for example,
    in the repetition of the conventional ‘in any case’ in Poem IV,
    which deals with casualties of the First World War: ‘These fought in
    any case, | and some believing, pro domo, in any case . . .’ (Ezra
    Pound, *Hugh Selwyn Mauberley* \[London: The Ovid Press, 1920\],
    p. 12).

[^64]: Prynne to Olson, 7 November 1962.

[^65]: Prynne to Dorn, 31 December 1962.

[^66]: Prynne to Dorn, 10 December 1962.

[^67]: Kingsley Amis, quoted in Zachary Leader, *The Life of Kingsley
    Amis* (London: Random House, 2013), p. 284.

[^68]: Prynne to Dorn, 14 April 1963.

[^69]: Davie, ‘Spender Struggling’, *The New Statesman*, 65 (29 March
    1963), p. 465.

[^70]: Prynne to Dorn, 10 December 1962.

[^71]: Prynne to Olson, 24 April 1963; Prynne to Dorn, 17 June 1965.

[^72]: Prynne to Peter Riley, 9 August 1967.

[^73]: Prynne to Riley, 7 February 1968.

[^74]: Charles Tomlinson, ‘The Art of Poetry No. 78’, interviewed by
    Willard Spiegelman, *The Paris Review*, 149 (Winter 1998),
    &lt;http://www.theparisreview.org/interviews/1033/the-art-of-poetry-no-78-charles-tomlinson&gt;
    \[accessed 17 November 2014\].

[^75]: ‘The Literary Society’, *Fifty-Fifth Annual Report* (Cambridge:
    Jesus College Society, 1959), 60–61 (p. 61).

[^76]: Tomlinson, p. 208.

[^77]: *Ibid*., p. 210.

[^78]: *Ibid*., p. 213.

[^79]: *Ibid*., pp. 216–17.

[^80]: As Prynne puts it in a recent interview, ‘Davie wanted very much
    to be a poet. I think he probably knew in his heart of hearts that
    he actually wasn’t a poet, though he cared enough about poetry to
    commit himself to substantial efforts to develop some way of
    expanding his own writing practise’ (Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’,
    p. 178.

[^81]: Donald Davie and D.J. Enright, ‘*New Lines* and Mr. Tomlinson’,
    *Essays in Criticism*, 7.2 (April 1957), 343–45 (pp. 343–44).

[^82]: *Ibid*., p. 345.

[^83]: Martin Dodsworth, ‘The Movement: Never and Always’, in *The
    Oxford Handbook of Contemporary British and Irish Poetry*, ed. by
    Peter Robinson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), 94–110
    (p. 103).

[^84]: Marriott, p. 81, n. 8.

[^85]: Prynne to Dorn, 31 December 1962.

[^86]: Schedule, *Radio Times* (13 December 1962), p. 13.

[^87]: Schedule, *Radio Times* (6 December 1962), p. 49. It would,
    however, be misleading to characterise the Programme’s output as
    entirely academic: as well as music, which made up roughly half of
    the content, broadcasts also featured discussions of contemporary
    political and social issues and modern poetry. Two days before
    Prynne’s talk, the Programme featured a rebroadcast of a
    conversation with Michael Horovitz and readings by Pete Brown, Harry
    Fainlight, Anselm Hollo and Adrian Mitchell (*ibid*., p. 35). A
    detailed account of the BBC’s dealings with contemporary poets
    through the Third Programme, concentrating primarily on the 1940s
    and ’50s, can be found in Kate Whitehead, *The Third Programme: A
    Literary History* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989).

[^88]: David Daiches, another of Prynne’s potential supervisors at
    Jesus, was also a regular feature on the Third Programme throughout
    the 1950s and ’60s.

[^89]: Peter Orr, ed., *The Poet Speaks: Interviews with Contemporary
    Poets* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1966). Prynne’s interview
    was not included in this book.

[^90]: Prynne interviewed by Peter Orr, *The Poet Speaks*, Programme 39
    (6 January 1964).

[^91]: Prynne, ‘“Modernism” in German Poetry’, *The Cambridge Review* (9
    March 1963), 331–37 (p. 337).

[^92]: Prynne, ‘from a letter’, p. 3; Prynne to Olson, 4 November 1961.
    The implicit denunciation of Auden here bears comparison with F.R.
    Leavis’s attitude to the ‘MacSpaunday’ group, a conjunction which
    will be explored in the following section of this chapter.

[^93]: Prynne to Olson, 9 September 1962.

[^94]: Tomlinson, ‘The Art of Poetry’. Prynne himself notes, in a letter
    to Dorn, that ‘Davie has encouraged \[Tomlinson\] right from his
    smallest beginnings \[…\] and done his best to get him accepted here
    \[i.e. in England\] (in the face of concerted indifference from
    almost all sides)’ (Prynne to Dorn, 9 July 1962).

[^95]: Zachary Leader, ‘Introduction: Origins and Ambivalences’, in *The
    Movement Reconsidered: Essays on Larkin, Amis, Gunn, Davie and Their
    Contemporaries* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009), 1–15
    (p. 8).

[^96]: David Trotter, *The Making of the Reader: Language and
    Subjectivity in Modern American, English and Irish Poetry* (London:
    Macmillan, 1984), p. 221.

[^97]: In this respect, Prynne followed Leavis’s strictures against the
    ‘literary racket’ much more closely than any of the poets of the
    Movement, who, if critics such as Blake Morrison are to be believed,
    looked to ‘the great doctor’ as a key influence (Blake Morrison,
    *The Movement: English Poetry and Fiction of the 1950s* \[Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 1980\], pp. 63–4).

[^98]: Prynne and Keston Sutherland, ‘Introduction to Prynne’s Poems in
    Chinese’, *Cambridge Quarterly*, 41.1 (2012), 197–207 (p. 199). The
    Cambridge English Faculty was formally founded in 1919 and English
    was given its own independent, two-part Tripos in 1926. Whatever the
    measure, Prynne has been involved with the Faculty for well over
    three fifths of its short but eventful life.

[^99]: Prynne did in fact begin a doctoral thesis on the work of Thomas
    Hardy, but only completed one year of research before his election
    (Johansson, p. 67, n. 66).

[^100]: Andrea Brady, letter, *Cambridge Literary Review*, 1.2 (Lent
    2010), 244–49 (p. 244).

[^101]: Nigel Wheale, ‘Cambridge School, The’, in *The Oxford Companion
    to Modern Poetry*, 2nd edn,
    &lt;http://www.oxfordreference.com/view/10.1093/acref/9780199640256.001.0001/acref-9780199640256-e-1383&gt;
    \[accessed 15 December 2014\].

[^102]: Christopher Hilliard, *English as a Vocation: The ‘Scrutiny’
    Movement* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), pp. 263–69. While
    there were no Downing English matriculants from St Dunstan’s in
    Prynne’s year, one boy from the year below was successful.

[^103]: David Matthews, *Memories of F.R. Leavis* (Bishopstone: Edgeways
    Books, 2010), p. 4.

[^104]: Prynne and Sutherland, p. 201.

[^105]: ‘Papers Relating to “Players of Shakespeare”’, *Archives Hub*,
    &lt;http://archiveshub.ac.uk/data/gb2188-dsh04&gt; \[accessed 16
    November 2014\]. Prynne’s contemporary at Jesus, the medievalist
    A.C. Spearing, pays tribute to Brockbank’s teaching in the paperback
    edition of his *Readings in Medieval Poetry* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1989), p. ix.

[^106]: *Fifty-Fifth Annual Report* (Cambridge: Jesus College Cambridge
    Society, 1959), p. 44.

[^107]: Janet Burroway, ‘Was Too: Time Passed with David Daiches’, in
    *David Daiches: A Celebration of His Life and Work*, ed. by William
    Baker and Michael Lister (Brighton: Sussex Academic Press, 2008),
    28–35 (p. 29); David Daiches, *A Third World* (Brighton: Sussex
    University Press, 1971), p. 39. A double-edged summary of Leavis’s
    position in Daiches’s *The Present Age* (London: The Cresset Press,
    1958), pp. 135–41, in which the prophet of Downing is described by
    turns as ‘brilliant’, ‘shrill’ and ‘tedious’, supports the idea of a
    certain antipathy between the two men.

[^108]: Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’, p. 186; Raymond Williams, ‘Our Debt
    to Dr. Leavis’, *Critical Quarterly*, 1.3 (September 1959),
    pp. 245–56.

[^109]: Prynne, ‘The Elegiac World in Victorian Poetry’, *The Listener*
    (14 February 1963), 290–91 (p. 290).

[^110]: *Ibid*., pp. 290–91. Prynne here exhibits a style of argument
    which could be described charitably as telegraphic: it is not
    entirely clear, for instance, that the clause preceding ‘since’
    follows logically from that which succeeds it. When considered
    closely, the idea that ‘\[t\]he world is as wide as the range of
    one’s desires and virtuosity of expression makes it to be’ begins to
    seem more appropriate to a poet such as Whitman than to Tennyson,
    the poet laureate most famous for his short and relatively
    restrained lyrics.

[^111]: John Stuart Mill, quoted in *ibid*., p. 291; Mill, ‘Tennyson’s
    Poems’, in *The Collected Works of John Stuart Mill, Volume 1 –
    Autobiography and Literary Essays*, ed. by John M. Robson (London:
    Routledge, 2013), 395–418 (p. 399).

[^112]: F.R. Leavis, *New Bearings in English Poetry: A Study of the
    Contemporary Situation* (London: Chatto & Windus, 1932), p. 12.

[^113]: Prynne, ‘The Elegiac World’, p. 290. Similar points are often
    made by Leavis, e.g. the following passage from a discussion of
    *Scrutiny*’s attitude to Marxism: ‘A culture expressing itself in a
    tradition of literature and art \[…\] can be in a healthy state only
    if this tradition is in living relation with a real culture, shared
    by the people at large. The point might be enforced by saying (there
    is no need to elaborate) that Shakespeare did not invent the
    language he used’ (Leavis, ‘Under Which King, Bezonian?’, in *A
    Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 1, ed. by Leavis \[Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1968\], 166–74 \[p. 169\]). The
    parenthetical ‘there is no need to elaborate’ is a characteristic
    Leavisian move. Prynne’s choice of ‘Lycidas’ as an example may have
    been inspired by John Crowe Ransom’s ‘A Poem Nearly Anonymous’ (*The
    American Review* \[May 1933\], pp. 179–203), an essay of which he
    spoke approvingly in 2014 (Prynne, ‘A Dialogue with Nicholas
    Royle’).

[^114]: Leavis, *New Bearings*, p. 10. The astonishing audacity of this
    claim is, again, characteristic of Leavis’s critical work, and finds
    a parallel in the ‘telegraphic’ style attributed to Prynne above.

[^115]: *Ibid*., p. 12.

[^116]: *Ibid*., p. 15.

[^117]: Prynne, ‘The Elegiac World’, p. 290.

[^118]: *Ibid*., p. 291. Prynne’s position *vis-à-vis* Eliot is made
    much clearer in the 1962 letter to the little magazine *Mica* cited
    earlier, in which Eliot’s ‘fundamental error’ is given as his
    tendency to make the poem’s ‘object \[…\] the poet’s anterior
    experience’ rather than ‘the poem’s achieved shape’ (‘from a
    letter’, p. 28).

[^119]: Leavis, *New Bearings*, p. 83.

[^120]: Prynne, ‘The Elegiac World’, p. 291. The sense of Eliot as
    continuing a tradition is reiterated in negative terms in the review
    of the German poetry anthology, in which Prynne claims that ‘only
    Pound can be said to have resisted all the attractions of reversion
    to some aspect of th\[e\] Pre-Raphaelite or Tennysonian ethos’
    (Prynne, ‘“Modernism” in German Poetry’, p. 332).

[^121]: *Ibid*., p. 290.

[^122]: Clark, ‘Prynne and the Movement’.

[^123]: James Keery, ‘The Great Tradition’, *PN Review*, 23.6 (1997),
    &lt;http://www.pnreview.co.uk\slash cgi-bin\slash scribe?item\_id=35&gt;
    \[accessed 28 November 2014\].

[^124]: According to Davie in his admittedly partisan account, ‘Prynne’s
    emphasis is frequently on patience, on lowering the sights, settling
    for limited objectives’ (*Thomas Hardy and British Poetry*, p. 113).

[^125]: Prynne, ‘Force of Circumstance’, in *Force of Circumstance and
    Other Poems* (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1962), p. 1. This
    reticent relation between subject and object is similar to what
    Davie sees in Pound as the rejection of ‘an imperious, appropriating
    attitude towards the perceived world’ (Davie, *Ezra Pound: Poet as
    Sculptor*, p. 173).

[^126]: Aristotle, *On Interpretation*, trans. by E.M. Edghill, in *The
    Works of Aristotle*, vol. 1, ed. by W.D. Ross (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 1928), 19a25.

[^127]: Introducing ‘The Corn Burned by Sirius’ during a 1971 reading in
    Vancouver, Prynne explained that the poem ‘is borrowed in every
    sense but the literal from a book which I have really had in my mind
    for years now, the *Consolation of Philosophy* by Boethius’ (Prynne,
    reading \[York Street Commune, Vancouver, 1 August 1971\], *Archive
    of the Now*
    &lt;http://www.archiveofthenow.org/authors/?i=77&f=1762\#1762&gt;
    \[accessed 17 December 2014\]).

[^128]: For Clive Bell, a key participant, Bloomsbury was firmly in the
    past tense as early as 1954 (Clive Bell, ‘What was “Bloomsbury”?’,
    *Twentieth Century* \[February 1954\], pp. 153–60); Prynne to Olson,
    4 November 1961; Prynne to Olson, 26 November 1961.

[^129]: Prynne to Dorn, 9 July 1962. That the Bloomsbury Set was
    self-evidently *not* ‘in the saddle’ in 1961, many of its key
    members being long-dead, supports the idea that this was a judgement
    adopted wholesale from Leavis rather than Prynne’s own considered
    view of the contemporary situation.

[^130]: Leavis, ‘Keynes, Spender and Currency-Values’, in *A Selection
    from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 1, 185–96 (p. 195); Prynne to Riley, 21 May
    1967. This position is also reflective of the more general,
    anti-personal attitude expressed by Davie in his poem to Tomlinson,
    ‘To a Brother in the Mystery’: ‘Never care so much | For leaves or
    people, but you care for stone | A little more’ (Davie, *New &
    Selected Poems* \[Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1961\],
    p. 46). It is of course ironic that both F.R. Leavis and Prynne
    would subsequently come to be associated, in the semi-popular
    imagination, with precisely the sort of intellectual coterie
    arrangements that they set out to criticise.

[^131]: Q.D. Leavis, ‘The Background of Twentieth Century Letters’, in
    *A Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 1, 162–66 \[p. 165\].

[^132]: Prynne to Riley, 24 April 1967; Prynne to Riley, 16 March 1969.
    The surface-level meaning of ‘camp’ in ‘camp followers’ is
    ‘encampment’, but it would be implausible to claim that the
    phonologically and semantically attentive Prynne is unaware of its
    other meanings. In any case, the phrase ‘camp followers’ itself
    carries sexual connotations, referring to wives and prostitutes
    travelling with an army.

[^133]: Leavis, *Mass Civilisation and Minority Culture* (Cambridge: The
    Minority Press, 1930), pp. 14–15.

[^134]: Prynne to Dorn, 23 April 1963.

[^135]: Prynne to Diana Athill, 17 November 1964. Later in the letter,
    Prynne takes a swipe at C.P. Snow, a quintessentially Leavisian
    move.

[^136]: Prynne, ‘from a letter’, p. 28.

[^137]: Prynne, ‘Resistance and Difficulty’, *Prospect*, 5 (Winter
    1961), pp. 26–30; editorial note, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964),
    \[p. 45\]. For discussion of both *Prospect* and ‘Resistance and
    Difficulty’, see Chapter 2.

[^138]: Prynne to Olson, 8 January 1962.

[^139]: Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, pp. 169–70.

[^140]: Prynne to Riley, 13 September 1967.

[^141]: Prynne to Riley, 13 June 1967.

[^142]: Michael Rustin, ‘Revisiting the *May Day Manifesto* of 1967–68’,
    in *May Day Manifesto 1967–68*, ed. by Raymond Williams (London:
    Lawrence & Wishart, 2013), vi–xxi (p. vi). In his *Paris Review*
    interview, Prynne describes how he ‘objected to Raymond Williams’s
    ideologies when he was my teacher \[at Jesus College\]’, but ‘became
    much more committed ideologically to what would be regarded as a
    left-wing \[…\] point of view’ during the escalation of the Vietnam
    War in the mid-to-late 1960s, partly as a result of conversations
    with Ed Dorn. He goes on to describe his present political position
    as that of ‘a peculiar and extraneous Marxist, in some sense of that
    word’ (Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’, p. 186).

[^143]: *May Day Manifesto*, p. 47.

[^144]: *Ibid*., p. 50.

[^145]: Andrew Chitty, ‘The Early Marx on Needs’, *Radical Philosophy*,
    64 (Summer 1993), 23–31 (p. 23).

[^146]: Karl Marx, *Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844*,
    trans. by Martin Mulligan (Moscow: Progress, 1959); Marx, ‘Comments
    on James Mill, *Éléments d’économie politique*’, trans. by Clemens
    Dutt, in Marx and Friedrich Engels, *Collected Works, Volume 3: Marx
    and Engels, 1843–1844* (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1975),
    pp. 211–28.

[^147]: Hilliard, pp. 56–58; Lynd, Robert S. and Helen Merrell,
    *Middletown: A Study in American Culture* (New York: Harcourt, Brace
    and Company, 1929).

[^148]: *Ibid*., pp. 180–81.

[^149]: Snow delivered the 1959 Rede Lecture at the Senate House,
    Cambridge on the theme of ‘The Two Cultures and the Scientific
    Revolution’, referring to what he perceived as a growing split
    between scholars in the humanities and scientists; he was rebuked by
    Leavis in the 1962 Richmond Lecture, delivered at Downing College.
    The resulting controversy became known as the ‘Two Cultures debate’.

[^150]: Leavis, ‘Revaluations (VIII): Shelley’, *Scrutiny*, 4.2 (1935),
    158–80 (p. 159).

[^151]: *Ibid*., p. 160.

[^152]: Desmond King-Hele, quoted in Roy Fuller, ‘The Osmotic Sap’,
    *Times Literary Supplement* (6 May 1971), 559–61 (p. 559);
    King-Hele, *Shelley: His Thought and Work* (London: Macmillan,
    1960), p. 216.

[^153]: F.R. Leavis, letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (21 May 1971),
    p. 593.

[^154]: Prynne, letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (28 May 1971),
    p. 620.

[^155]: *Ibid*.

[^156]: Ross Wilson, *Shelley and the Apprehension of Life* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2013), p. 25.

[^157]: Prynne, letter, *TLS* (28 May 1971).

[^158]: Jerome McGann, review, *Modern Philology*, 66.3 (February 1969),
    280–83 (p. 280).

[^159]: P.H. Butter, review, *Modern Language Review*, 64.2 (April
    1969), 407–08 (p. 407); Butter, review, *Modern Language Review*,
    65.4 (October 1970), 882–83 (p. 882).

[^160]: Prynne, *They That Haue Powre to Hurt; A Specimen of a
    Commentary on Shake-speares Sonnets, 94* (Cambridge: privately
    printed, 2001); Prynne, *Field Notes: ‘The Solitary Reaper’ and
    Others* (Cambridge: privately printed, 2007); Prynne, *George
    Herbert, ‘Love \[III\]’: A Discursive Commentary* (Cambridge:
    privately printed, 2011).

[^161]: William Carlos Williams, ‘Introduction to *The Wedge*’, in
    *Selected Essays* (New York: Random House, 1954), p. 256.

[^162]: Wallace Stevens, ‘Prologues to What is Possible’, *The Hudson
    Review*, 5.3 (Autumn 1952), pp. 330–31; ‘The World as Meditation’,
    *ibid*., p. 334.

[^163]: Prynne, *Concepts and Conception in Poetry* (Cambridge: Critical
    Documents, 2014), p. 40.

[^164]: *Ibid*., pp. 39–40.

[^165]: *Ibid*., p. 44.

[^166]: Hilliard, p. 4.

[^167]: Ian MacKillop, *F.R. Leavis: A Life in Criticism* (London: Allen
    Lane), p. 152.

[^168]: *Ibid*., p. 160.

[^169]: Leavis, *Scrutiny: A Retrospect* (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, 1963), p. 1. For a lucid analysis of this
    ambivalence, see Perry Anderson, ‘Components of the National
    Culture’, *New Left Review*, 1.50 (1968), 3–57 (pp. 53–55).

[^170]: Prynne to Dorn, 16 June 1963.

[^171]: *Ibid*.

[^172]: *Ibid*.

[^173]: ‘The Library’s Place’, *Times Literary Supplement* (9 August
    1963), p. 609. The leader was occasioned by an open letter to *The
    Times* from librarians at the universities of Birmingham, Glasgow
    and Manchester (K.W. Humphreys, R.O. MacKenna and M. Tyson, letter,
    *The Times* \[2 August 1963\], p. 13), and by a response from the
    head librarian at the Bodleian, J.N.L. Myers, which was highly
    critical of the University Grants Committee’s recently formed
    subcommittee on library issues (*The Times* \[6 August 1963\],
    p. 9).

[^174]: Prynne, letter, *Times Literary Supplement* (16 August 1963),
    p. 629.

[^175]: Leavis, *Two Cultures?: The Significance of C.P. Snow*, ed. by
    Stefan Collini (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013),
    p. 112. As Collini points out, ‘Lord Robbins, symbolically if not
    practically the chief architect of \[university\] expansion, figured
    prominently in Leavis’s demonology in the 1960s, especially for the
    priority he appeared to give (in his famous report on higher
    education) to meeting “the needs of the economy”’ (‘Introduction’,
    in Leavis, *Two Cultures?*, 1–42 \[p. 38\]).

[^176]: *Ibid*., p. 111. Leavis’s broader views on higher education, set
    out most clearly in *Education and the University* (1943), had of
    course been circulating for decades by the time of Prynne’s letter.

[^177]: ‘Securing a Sustainable Future for Higher Education’ (12 October
    2010),
    &lt;https://www.gov.uk\slash government\slash uploads\slash system\slash uploads\slash attachment\_data\slash file\slash 31999\slash 10–1208-securing-sustainable-higher-education-browne-report.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 3 March 2014\]; ‘Higher Education: Students at the Heart
    of the System’, *Department for Business, Innovation & Skills* (June
    2011),
    &lt;https://www.gov.uk\slash government\slash uploads\slash system\slash uploads\slash attachment\_data\slash file\slash 31384/11–944-higher-education-students-at-heart-of-system.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 3 March 2014\].

[^178]: Prynne, contribution to a discussion in the Senate House,
    *Cambridge University Reporter*, 141.15 \[2011\],
    &lt;http://www.admin.cam.ac.uk/reporter/2010–11/weekly/6211/section13.shtml&gt;
    \[accessed 26 February 2014\].

[^179]: Prynne, ‘L’Extase de M. Poher’, in *Poems*, pp. 161–62. It is
    worth pointing out that Prynne’s apparent enthusiasm for the
    traditional university structure has a direct bearing on poetry.
    Speaking in conversation with Nicholas Royle in 2014, he declared
    that much of contemporary English literary culture is ‘inert’, but
    that ‘university communities’ and ‘student communities’ continue to
    produce valuable work (Prynne, ‘A Dialogue with Nicholas Royle’).

[^180]: The seriousness of Prynne’s commitment to the principle of
    academic autonomy is shown by an incident from 2008. Having pleaded
    guilty to serious child pornography charges, a Caius fellow was
    being considered for dismissal. According to a report in the student
    newspaper *Varsity*, Prynne wrote to his colleagues arguing against
    ‘giv\[ing\] consideration to questions of possible public interest
    and outside reactions’ when making the decision, asserting that
    ‘\[w\]e are a sovereign community of Fellows and we should act in
    the light of our individual conscience and judgement’ (Hugo Gye,
    ‘Hammond to keep job’, *Varsity* \[6 November 2008\],
    &lt;http://www.varsity.co.uk/news/1077&gt; \[accessed 15 October
    2015\]).

[^181]: Prynne to Dorn, 10 January 1972.

[^182]: Samuel Solomon, ‘Reproducing the Line: 1970s Innovative Poetry
    and Socialist-Feminism in the UK’ (unpublished doctoral thesis,
    University of Southern California, 2012), pp. 70–72.

[^183]: Prynne, ‘Tips on Reading, for Students of English’, *Gonville
    and Caius College*,
    &lt;http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk\slash students\slash study\slash english\slash tips\slash reading.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 23 September 2014\], p. 14. The model of ‘being human’
    evinced here is, of course, fundamentally reproductive and
    consequently has strongly heteronormative implications. Prynne does
    nothing to undercut this interpretation.

[^184]: Leavis, ‘A Review’, Scrutiny, 4.1 (June 1935), pp. 96–100; F.W.
    Bateson, ‘A Reply’, Scrutiny, 4.2 (September 1935), pp. 181–85;
    Leavis, ‘A Rejoinder’, ibid., pp. 185–87; Leavis, ‘The Responsible
    Critic or The Function of Criticism at Any Time’, Scrutiny, 19.3
    (Spring 1953), pp. 162–84); Bateson, ‘The Responsible Critic’,
    Scrutiny, 19.4 (October 1953), pp. 317–21); Leavis, ‘A Rejoinder’,
    ibid., pp. 321–28. All of these pieces are printed in A Selection
    from ‘Scrutiny’, 2 vols.

[^185]: Davie, ‘Academicism and Jonathan Swift’, *Twentieth Century*
    (September 1953), 217–24 (p. 217).

[^186]: *Ibid*.

[^187]: *Ibid*., pp. 222–23.

[^188]: *Ibid*., p. 223.

[^189]: Davie, ‘Is There a London Literary Racket?’, *Twentieth Century*
    (June 1954), 540–46 (p. 543). It is of course ironic that Davie made
    this statement barely three months before J.D. Scott kicked off the
    Movement’s own spate of poetic racketeering.

[^190]: *Ibid*., p. 545. Davie concludes his tirade with the
    qualification that ‘perhaps this is unfair’, but does not explain in
    what way.

[^191]: This is not to say that this principle *never* wavered; there
    are outlying examples such as a 1974 review written for *The
    Spectator* (Prynne, ‘Out of the shade’, *The Spectator* \[19 January
    1974\], pp. 78–79).

[^192]: Thomas Mallon, ‘The Underreachers’, *Contemporary Literature*,
    22.2 (Spring 1981), 243–47 (p. 246).

[^193]: *Modernist Magazines Project*,
    &lt;http://www.modernistmagazines.com/&gt; \[accessed 15 January
    2015\]; Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker, eds., *The Oxford Critical
    and Cultural History of Modernist Magazines, Volume 1 Britain and
    Ireland 1880–1955* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009); Brooker
    and Thacker, eds., *The Oxford Critical and Cultural History of
    Modernist Magazines, Volume II: North America 1894–1960* (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 2012); Brooker, Thacker, Sascha Bru and
    Christian Weikop, eds., *The Oxford Critical and Cultural History of
    Modernist Magazines, Volume III: Europe 1880–1940* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2013).

[^194]: Richard Price, ‘Little Magazines’, *British Library*,
    &lt;http://www.bl.uk\slash reshelp\slash findhelprestype\slash journals\slash  littlemagazines\slash littlemagazines.html&gt;
    \[accessed 15 January 2015\].

[^195]: Wolfgang Görtschacher, *Little Magazine Profiles: The Little
    Magazines in Great Britain, 1939–1993* (Salzburg: University of
    Salzburg, 1993).

[^196]: The relationship between little magazine producers and external
    institutions is described as only ‘formally independent’ in order to
    acknowledge the many forms of informal institutional support that
    exist. This is clearest in the case of magazines produced by members
    of universities, who may enjoy privileged access to means of
    physical production such as printers and photocopiers—or, in earlier
    periods, mimeograph machines—in arrangements which are contingent on
    their academic status and seniority.

[^197]: Mellors, *Late Modernist Poetics*, p. 118.

[^198]: *Ibid*.

[^199]: This structure bears some similarity to what Simon Jarvis, in
    his work on Theodor Adorno, terms a ‘real illusion’: ‘that is \[…\]
    an illusion which cannot be dispelled simply by recognising it as
    such’ (Simon Jarvis, *Adorno: A Critical Introduction* \[Cambridge:
    Polity Press, 1998\], p. 68).

[^200]: Mellors, p. 119.

[^201]: *Ibid*., p. 220.

[^202]: Prynne to Dorn, 22 January 1963.

[^203]: Poems that have never been printed as standalone books or
    pamphlets, such as ‘The Land of Saint Martin’ and ‘Refuse
    Collection’, have been excluded along with the periodicals in which
    they were originally published.

[^204]: Sutherland, ‘Introduction: “Prynne’s late work?”’, in *Hix Eros:
    On the Late Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, 9–13 (p. 11).

[^205]: Prynne, ‘Tomorrow is Fade Out Night’, *Prospect*, 6 (Spring
    1964), pp. 41–43.

[^206]: The most comprehensive account of the *Intelligencer* is
    provided by Latter; a much more concise introduction is offered in
    Neil Pattison, ‘Introduction: “All Flags Left Outside”’, in *Certain
    Prose*, pp. i–xxiv and ‘Editorial Notes’, in *ibid*., pp. xxv–xxxii.

[^207]: Susan Brown, email to the author, 9 October 2013. Some sense of
    what producing a sixth form magazine at a minor public or grammar
    school in this period actually involved is provided by Prynne’s
    near-contemporary Ian Hamilton in Dan Jacobson, ‘You Muddy Fools’
    (interview with Ian Hamilton), *London Review of Books*, 24.2 (14
    January 2002), pp. 3–14.

[^208]: *Ibid*.; Prynne, editorial statement, *Six* (1955),
    \[unpaginated\].

[^209]: *Ibid*.

[^210]: *Ibid*.

[^211]: Prynne, ‘Stille (nach Thomas Hood)’, *Six* (1955), p. 11. The
    poem is credited to ‘J.H.’ rather than ‘Jeremy’ Prynne, following a
    consistent form for all contributors, and perhaps representing the
    origin of the initialisation that Prynne would adopt for almost all
    of his subsequent poetic work.

[^212]: Prynne, ‘Times Trans-shifting: for Robert Herrick’, *Prospect*,
    4 (Winter 1960), p. 14; Prynne, ‘The Hazel Tree’, *Tomorrow*, 4
    (1960), p. 15.

[^213]: For brief accounts of the magazines by their primary editors,
    see Elaine Feinstein, ‘Remembering Prospect’, *Cambridge Literary
    Review*, 1.1 (Michaelmas 2010), pp. 141–47 and Jacobson.

[^214]: The magazines’ contents pages provide some incidental support
    for Blake Morrison’s emphasis on a geographical bifurcation in the
    Movement: *Prospect* published Davie, *Tomorrow* Elizabeth Jennings
    and Roy Fuller, though the latter also printed poems by the
    Cambridge-educated D.J. Enright (Morrison, pp. 10–41).

[^215]: It is worth remembering that this poem was published less than
    four years after Prynne had completed his two-year period as a
    National Service officer, and may have been written significantly
    earlier.

[^216]: Prynne, ‘Landfall’, *Lyrische Hefte*, 10 (November 1961), p. 19.
    Though the essay, originally delivered as a lecture in Darmstadt in
    1951, was not translated into English until two decades later
    (*Poetry, Language, Thought*, trans. by Alfred Hofstadter \[New
    York: Harper and Row, 1971\], pp. 145–161), it seems likely that
    Prynne would have encountered it in German. In the recent essay
    ‘Huts’, he recalls ‘studying with great ardency’ a 1950 edition of
    Heidegger’s *Holzwege* (Prynne, ‘Huts’, p. 628).

[^217]: ‘Damp’, *Mica*, 2 (February 1961), p. 22; ‘Perspective from a
    Chalk Pit’, *ibid*., p. 23; ‘Surface Measures’, *Mica*, 4 (Fall
    1961), p. 30; ‘Until Later On’, *ibid*., p. 31; ‘from a letter’.

[^218]: ‘Early Yesterday Morning’, *Satis*, 5 (Spring–Summer 1962),
    p. 14; ‘In Praise’, *ibid*., pp. 14–15.

[^219]: For detailed analysis of the relationship between *Migrant*,
    *Mica* and *Satis*, and of Prynne’s involvement with the latter two,
    see Louis Goddard, ‘Migration Patterns: Two Little Magazines of
    1960–1962’, *Textual Practice*,
    &lt;http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0950236X.2016.1188143&gt;
    \[accessed 11 July 2014\].

[^220]: ‘Editorial’, *Satis*, 5 (Spring–Summer 1962), p. 2.

[^221]: J.C.A. Rathmell, ‘Paradigms for a Wider Concern’ (review of
    *Force of Circumstance*), *The Cambridge Review* (19 January 1963),
    pp. 193–94; Prynne, ‘Figments of Reflection’ (review of Charles
    Edward Eaton, *Countermoves*), *The Cambridge Review* (16 Feb 1963),
    pp. 281, 283; Prynne, ‘“Modernism” in German Poetry’ (review of
    Michael Hamburger and Christopher Middleton, eds., *Modern German
    Poetry, 1910–1960*’), *The Cambridge Review* (9 Mar 1963),
    pp. 331–33, 335, 337.

[^222]: Prynne to Riley, 25 February 1969. The Olson review was
    eventually printed in *The Park*, 4.5 (Summer 1969), pp. 64–66,
    while the Creeley review can be found in Box 19, Folder 327 of Ed
    Dorn’s papers.

[^223]: *Ibid*.

[^224]: *Ibid*.

[^225]: Prynne to Riley, 16 February 1969.

[^226]: Ian Brinton, ‘Prynne in Prospect’, *academia.edu*,
    &lt;https://www.academia.edu/6185230/Prynne\_in\_Prospect&gt;
    \[accessed 21 January 2015\].

[^227]: Prynne to Olson, 4 November 1961.

[^228]: Prynne to Olson, 26 November 1961.

[^229]: Prynne to Dorn, 29 November 1961. In his initial letter to Dorn,
    Prynne notes that *Prospect* is ‘not out to shock like Tom Raworth’s
    OUTBURST’ (Prynne to Dorn, 16 November 1961).

[^230]: Prynne to Dorn, 29 November 1961.

[^231]: Prynne refers to Corman by his Christian name, whereas in his
    initial letters to Olson and Dorn he uses full names (Prynne to
    Corman, 17 June 1961).

[^232]: Prynne to Corman, 18 October 1961.

[^233]: Prynne to Corman, 19 November 1961.

[^234]: Prynne to Olson, 14 February 1962.

[^235]: Prynne to Dorn, 9 July 1962; Prynne to Dorn, 26 September 1962.

[^236]: Prynne to Olson, 1 February 1964; Prynne to Dorn, 30 June 1964.

[^237]: Prynne to Olson, 29 February 1964.

[^238]: Prynne to Dorn, 30 June 1964.

[^239]: Prynne to Robert Creeley, 21 October 1964.

[^240]: Q.D. Leavis, ‘Henry James’s Heiress: The Importance of Edith
    Wharton’, in *A Selection from ‘Scrutiny’*, vol. 2, pp. 124–36.

[^241]: Writing to Peter Riley about the *Intelligencer* several years
    later, Prynne goes so far as to claim that ‘I don’t want a magazine
    myself, but rather \[…\] a series of well printed pamphlets, really
    nicely done \[…\]. Even small books in due course, but they *must*
    be conspicuously well done’ (Prynne to Riley, 23 May 1967). As the
    absence of Prynne’s later books from @fig:mags suggests, this desire
    has been at least partially fulfilled.

[^242]: Prynne to Olson, 6 March 1964. While it is not entirely clear
    who is being referred to here, it is presumably not Rodney Dale,
    whose company Polyhedron had printed previous issues of the magazine
    and who is almost three years older than Prynne.

[^243]: *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), \[p. 45\].

[^244]: *Ibid*. Setting aside trivial examples such as the 1998 *Mays*
    anthology, *Six* and *Prospect* are the only ventures in relation to
    which Prynne has been listed unequivocally as ‘the editor’, despite
    his having exerted considerable editorial influence over *The
    English Intelligencer*. He is therefore able to assume a position of
    relative innocence when, as quoted above, he rails to Riley against
    ‘the patronising imbecilities of *editors*’ (Prynne to Riley, 25
    February 1969).

[^245]: Prynne reveals his intention to transform the distribution of
    *Prospect* as early as his first letter to Olson: ‘I would rather
    work to a private circulation & print what needs to come out (like
    ORIGIN), but don’t have the choice as things are’ (Prynne to Olson,
    26 November 1961). That *Origin*’s distribution methods were as
    important to him as its content is confirmed by the recent *Paris
    Review* interview, in which Prynne notes explicitly that’\[i\]t was
    never circulated at cost. It was sent to selected recipients who
    were serious about the content’ (Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’,
    p. 181).

[^246]: Charles Olson, *Letters for Origin, 1950–1956*, ed. by Albert
    Glover (London: Cape Goliard, 1969).

[^247]: Olson, ‘Maximus to Gloucester’, *Prospect*, 1 (Summer 1959),
    pp. 19–20; Olson, ‘A Plantation—A Beginning’, *Prospect*, 4 (Spring
    1960), pp. 21–23; Olson, ‘Going Right Out of the Century’,
    *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), p. 33. A comma is inserted after
    ‘Maximus’ in the collected version of the former poem.

[^248]: Olson, ‘Letter to Elaine Feinstein’, in *Collected Prose*, ed.
    by Donald Allen and Benjamin Friedlander (Berkeley, CA: University
    of California Press, 1997), pp. 250–52. As Feinstein herself admits,
    ‘I started \[…\] *Prospect*, not to publish my own poems, but to
    introduce Olson, Paul Blackburn and others who weren’t yet known in
    this country’ (Michael Schmidt, ‘Elaine Feinstein in Conversation’,
    *PN Review*, 24.2 \[December 1997\], 36–41 \[p. 37\]).

[^249]: Tim Carmody, ‘Paper Modernism’, *Snarkmarket* (9 August 2009),
    &lt;http://snarkmarket.com\slash blog\slash snarkives\slash selfdisclosure\slash paper\_modernism/&gt;
    \[accessed 29 January 2015\].

[^250]: Prynne to Olson, 26 November 1961.

[^251]: Prynne to Dorn, 17 June 1965; Prynne to Dorn, 29 November 1961.

[^252]: Prynne to Corman, 19 November 1961.

[^253]: Prynne to Dorn, 6 May 1964; Robert Creeley, ‘The Grace’,
    *Prospect*, 6 (Spring 1964), pp. 25–28.

[^254]: Latter, *Late Modernism*, pp. 25–26. As Latter points out, the
    fact that the *Intelligencer* was ‘produced for free on a mimeograph
    machine in Gonville and Caius \[makes it\] exempt from at least one
    of the definitive features that Peter Brooker and Andrew Thacker use
    to characterize the modernist little magazine, namely that it is
    “short-lived, committed to experiment, in constant financial
    difficulties, and indifferent or directly opposed to commercial
    considerations”’ (p. 26). It also reveals the salience of the term
    ‘formally independent’ in this thesis’s own definition.

[^255]: John James, quoted in Latter, ‘Essential news’, p. 229.

[^256]: Latter, *Late Modernism*, p. 110.

[^257]: Editorial, in *Certain Prose*, 2:5 \[373\], p. 139; editorial,
    in *ibid*., 2:10 \[447\], p. 143; Prynne to Riley, 15 September
    1967. Subsequent quotations in this section are all from this
    letter, unless otherwise stated.

[^258]: This should perhaps already have been clear, given that Prynne
    was one of the foremost contributors of prose to the *Intelligencer*
    throughout its run—as well as numerous letters, the worksheet had by
    this point printed ‘A Note on Metal’ and ‘A Pedantic Note in Two
    Parts’.

[^259]: Percy Bysshe Shelley, *A Philosophical View of Reform* (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, 1920), p. 52. The passage quoted by Prynne
    stops at this point, having begun at ‘A writer of the present day’
    on p. 51 in the Oxford edition.

[^260]: ‘Hysteria over population’, *The Times* (6 September 1967),
    p. 13. According to John F. May, the PCC was ‘most influential in
    the creation of key population institutions, like UNFPA, and helped
    establish an Office of Population within USAID’ (John F. May, *World
    Population Policies: Their Origin, Evolution, and Impact* \[Berlin:
    Springer, 2012\], p. 94, n. 1).

[^261]: In the 1976 film adaptation starring Michael York, future
    society is explicitly controlled by ‘servo-mechanisms’, though this
    is not a term used in the book. A higher-brow carrier for similar
    concerns is Margaret Atwood’s debut novel *The Edible Woman* (1969),
    written in 1965, in which graduate student Fischer (‘Fish’) Smythe
    proposes a thesis on ‘Malthus and the Creative Metaphor’, tracking
    the supposedly ‘inescapable connection between the rise of the
    birth-rate in modern times, say the past two or three centuries,
    especially the eighteenth to the middle of the nineteenth, and the
    change in the way the critics have been thinking about poetry’
    (Margaret Atwood, *The Edible Woman* \[London: Virago, 2009\],
    p. 244).

[^262]: Hugh Noyes, ‘Abortion Bill over Last Commons Hurdles: Hint on
    Conscience Clause’, *The Times* (15 July 1967), p. 2.

[^263]: Prynne to Riley, 15 September 1967.

[^264]: A brief contemporary analysis of Labour policy over welfare
    selectivity is provided by Alan Watkins, ‘About-turn on welfare’,
    *The Spectator* (22 June 1967), pp. 3–4.

[^265]: An idea of Prynne’s general attitude towards government
    ‘intervention’ is given in a 1986 letter to Douglas Oliver.
    Responding to the latter’s long poem *The Infant and the Pearl*, an
    hallucinatory dream vision involving Margaret Thatcher, Prynne
    declares that ‘since behaviorism sponsors Regulation and Closure
    which are worst when most nearly beneficial and humane, I cannot
    voluntarily accept the maximalism of the left intervention
    (‘planning’) upon which its scheme of equitable hope has surely to
    be based. But by ethical compulsion I can and do, as a kind of
    self-wounding scourge against advantageous injustice by which the
    benefit is cruelly mine’ (Prynne to Douglas Oliver, 16 February
    1986).

[^266]: Prynne, ‘A Letter’, in *Certain Prose*, 1:12 \[189–91\], 28–29
    (p. 28). Of the 66 recipients listed in the *Intelligencer*’s last
    and longest circulation list (‘Certain Matters’, in *ibid*.,
    2:\[‘Ghost Issue’\] \[G16–17\], pp. 173–75), five are women, a rate
    of less than eight per cent.

[^267]: David Chaloner, ‘Bonfire’, *The English Intelligencer*, 2.12
    (September 1967), p. 477.

[^268]: Robert V. Roosa, ‘Judging the New Liquidity Plan’, *The Banker*,
    117.499 (September 1967), p. 756. The quotation selected by Prynne
    begins at ‘The overriding test’ and ends with ‘lose balance and
    collapse.’

[^269]: Shelley to John and Maria Gisborne, 13 November 1819, in *The
    Letters of Percy Bysshe Shelley*, vol. 2, ed. by Frederick L. Jones
    (Oxford: The Clarendon Press, 1964), p. 150.

[^270]: Prynne to Riley, unattached second page of letter.

[^271]: Prynne, ‘A Note on Metal’, in *Certain Prose*, 2:1 \[286–89\],
    pp. 104–09; Riley, ‘Working Notes on British Prehistory, or
    Archaeological Guesswork One’, in *ibid*., 1:14 (supplement)
    \[234–47\], pp. 47–73.

[^272]: Prynne, ‘A Note on Metal’, in *Aristeas* (London: Ferry Press,
    1968), pp. 14–17; *Poems* (Edinburgh and London: Agneau 2, 1982),
    pp. 125–30; *Poems* (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 1999), pp. 127–32; *Poems*
    (Tarset: Bloodaxe, 2005), pp. 127–32; *Poems* (Tarset: Bloodaxe,
    2015), pp. 127–32.

[^273]: ‘A Note on Metal’ does not appear directly adjacent to any of
    the *Aristeas* poems either in the *Intelligencer* or in any of the
    editions of *Poems*; as such, scholars should be wary of positing
    any too-rigid connection between them.

[^274]: C.D. Blanton, ‘Nominal Devolutions: Poetic Substance and the
    Critique of Political Economy’, *Yale Journal of Criticism*, 13
    (2000), pp. 129–51; Seeta Chaganti, ‘Vestigial Signs: Inscription,
    Performance, and The Dream of the Rood’, *PMLA*, 125 (2010),
    pp. 48–72; Jarvis, ‘Quality and the non-identical in J.H. Prynne’s
    “Aristeas, in Seven Years”’, *Parataxis*, 1 (1991), 69–86 (p. 83);
    Robin Purves, ‘Commentary on J.H. Prynne’s “Thoughts on the
    Esterházy Court Uniform”’, *Glossator*, 2 (2010), 79–88 (pp. 80–81);
    Reitha Pattison, ‘J.H. Prynne’s “The Corn Burned By Syrius”’,
    *ibid*., 89–114 (pp. 103–14); Alex Latter, ‘“Scheming for the
    possible world”: J.H. Prynne’s *The White Stones* and *The English
    Intelligencer*’, *Intercapillary Space*
    &lt;http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2010/04/scheming-for-possible-world-j.html&gt;
    \[accessed 17 March 2015\] (para. 2); Alistair Rider, ‘The “Curve
    over the Crest of the Hill”: Carl Andre and Richard Long’, in
    *Anglo-American Exchange in Postwar Sculpture, 1945–1975*, ed. by
    Rebecca Peabody (Los Angeles, CA: Getty Publications, 2011), 133–47
    (pp. 140–42); Nicholas Royle, *Veering: A Theory of Literature*
    (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2011), p. 51, n. 42.

[^275]: Inline citations in this chapter refer to *Poems* (Tarset:
    Bloodaxe, 2015).

[^276]: Dobran, ‘J.H. Prynne’s “Aristeas, in Seven Years” and *The
    English Intelligencer*’, *Journal of British and Irish Innovative
    Poetry*, 5.2 (2013), 20–42 (p. 39, n. 15).

[^277]: G.W.F. Hegel, *Lectures on the History of Philosophy: Medieval
    and Modern Philosophy*, trans. by E.S. Haldane and Frances H. Simson
    (Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1995), p. 257.

[^278]: *Ibid*., p. 256.

[^279]: In fact, as will be argued later in this chapter, Prynne
    is—deliberately—even more of a materialist than Marx.

[^280]: Sutherland, ‘*Sub Songs* versus the subject: Critical variations
    on a distinction between Prynne and Hegel’, in *Hix Eros: On the
    Late Poetry of J.H. Prynne*, 123–141 (p. 129).

[^281]: The exact status of this knowledge will be considered below.

[^282]: *Ibid*., p. 124.

[^283]: James D. Muhly, ‘Sources of Tin and the Beginnings of Bronze
    Metallurgy’, *American Journal of Archaeology*, 89.2 (April 1985),
    pp. 275–91; K. Aslıhan Yener, ‘Managing Metals: An Early Bronze Age
    Tin Production Site at Göltepe, Turkey’, *The Oriental Institute
    News & Notes*, 140 (1994), pp. 1–4; Rob Ixer, Richard Bevins and
    Nick Pearce, ‘Stonehenge rhyolitic bluestone sources and the
    application of zircon chemistry as a new tool for provenancing
    rhyolitic lithics’, *Journal of Archaeological Science*, 38.3 (March
    2011), pp. 605–22.

[^284]: ‘motive, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2015),
    &lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/122712&gt; \[accessed 18 March
    2015\].

[^285]: This attitude carries echoes of Martin Heidegger’s famous
    discussion of equipment and its ‘readiness-to-hand’ in Part One,
    Section III.15 of *Being and Time*, trans. by John Macquarrie and
    Edward Robinson (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1962), pp. 95–102.

[^286]: As in much of Prynne’s work, there is a potentially comic or
    satirical reading which exists alongside or underneath the more
    straight-faced interpretation given above. This rests primarily on
    the use of ‘leading edge’, one of a number of apparently
    anachronistic terms in the text. Appearing in the late nineteenth
    century as a term in nautical engineering and extending in the
    twentieth century to aviation, ‘leading edge’—along with its evolved
    version, ‘bleeding edge’, for ‘beyond leading edge’—is now more
    familiar as a piece of high-tech jargon, referring to ‘\[t\]he
    forefront or vanguard, esp. of technological development’ (‘leading
    edge, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2016),
    &lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/106611&gt; \[accessed 1 March
    2016\]). Its use in relation to ploughshares and bodkins may thus be
    interpreted as a deliberate puncturing of contemporary pretensions
    to technological sophistication and progress—Harold Wilson’s famous
    ‘white heat’—and, by extension, as a jab at the artistic and poetic
    avant-garde’s implicit mimicking of such debased narratives. That
    Prynne intended to use the term in this way is, however, far from
    clear. The earliest such usage given by the *OED* comes as late as
    1977, and while it is possible to dig up earlier examples they are
    extremely rare. In *The Times* throughout the entirety of the 1960s,
    the term is used almost invariably in an aeronautical or other
    industrial-scientific sense. The only instances in which it does not
    refer to an actual, physical edge are a description of the American
    University of Beirut as ‘a leading edge for modern education in the
    Middle East’ and a job advert titled simply ‘THE LEADING EDGE: |
    COMPUTER PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT’ (‘A century of U.S. influence on
    Arab education’, *The Times* \[11 October 1966\], p. 11; advert,
    *ibid*. \[29 August 1969\], p. 23).

[^287]: Gregory Clark, *A Farewell to Alms: A Brief Economic History of
    the World* (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007),
    p. 286. In his famous manifesto ‘Projective Verse’, Olson uses a
    reappropriated threshing floor as a metaphor: ‘And the threshing
    floor for the dance? Is it anything but the LINE?’ (Olson,
    ‘Projective Verse’, in *Collected Prose*, 239–249 \[p. 243\]).

[^288]: V. Gordon Childe, *The Prehistory of European Society* (London:
    Cassell, 1962), p. 166.

[^289]: C.M. Kraay, ‘Hoards, Small Change and the Origin of Coinage’,
    *Journal of Hellenic Studies*, 84 (1964), pp. 76–91.

[^290]: This is perhaps the inverse (or the equivalent from a reversed
    perspective) of James Lovelock’s view of humanity as nothing more
    than an element in a chemical reaction: ‘Our mistake when we started
    the Anthropocene was to fail to notice that inadvertently we were
    the catalyst of the reaction between the carbon of coal and the
    oxygen of the air’ (James Lovelock, *A Rough Ride to the Future*
    \[London: Allen Lane, 2014\], p. 10).

[^291]: Marx’s analysis of ‘Historical Facts about Merchant’s Capital’
    in Chapter 20 of the third volume of *Capital* makes clear that this
    form of capital existed as far back as ‘Carthage, Rome, and later
    among the Venetians, Portuguese, Dutch, etc.’ (Karl Marx, *Capital*,
    3rd vol., ed. by Friedrich Engels, in *Marx/Engels Collected Works*,
    37th vol. \[New York: International Publishers, 1998\], p. 330).

[^292]: Prynne to Riley, 15 September 1967.

[^293]: Blanton, p. 130.

[^294]: *Ibid*.

[^295]: *Ibid*., p. 131.

[^296]: Chaganti, p. 48.

[^297]: As Riley puts it, ‘\[a\] theme that something existed in the
    life of man, *as* the life of man on this island up to about 1500BC
    at the latest, that we’ve lost sight of and need to reconsider. That
    we cd \[*sic*\] get it back is a thought that frightens with its
    possibilities. That we could recover something of our inheritance
    *without* anachronism, through if anywhere this thing I hold now,
    discourse’ (‘Working Notes on British Prehistory’, p. 48). The
    collective pronoun here refers to the readers of and contributors to
    *The English Intelligencer*.

[^298]: According to Nealon, ‘Prynne’s ambition is towards a poetry that
    would stage cognition’s ability to reverse time’. Nealon makes clear
    that ‘a belief in this ability organizes Prynne’s essays as well as
    his poems’, giving ‘A Note on Metal’ as a specific example (Nealon,
    ‘The Prynne Reflex’).

[^299]: Prynne’s explicit subject is, admittedly, metal; still, this
    does not prevent him from offering a detailed account of metal’s
    relationship with stone.

[^300]: Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, p. 189.

[^301]: *Ibid*., p. 192.

[^302]: Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’, p. 185.

[^303]: *Ibid*., pp. 195–96.

[^304]: Prynne may have met Wild, or at least come into contact with the
    philosopher’s work, during his short fellowship at Harvard, where
    Wild taught from 1927 to 1961. As Sutherland points out, the
    didactic portion of the essay also appears to have been heavily
    influenced by Herbert Spiegelberg’s *The Phenomenological Movement*
    (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1959) (Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and
    Philology’, p. 107).

[^305]: John Wild, ‘Contemporary Phenomenology and the Problem of
    Existence’, *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, 20.2
    (December 1959), 166–180 (p. 171).

[^306]: *Ibid*., p. 174.

[^307]: Prynne, ‘Resistance and Difficulty’, p. 28.

[^308]: *Ibid*., p. 29.

[^309]: *Ibid*., p. 30.

[^310]: There are obvious similarities between this perspective and
    Prynne’s opposition to ‘meditative’ Victorian poetry, as discussed
    in Chapter 1. On the issue of the creation or mere modification of
    resistant material, Prynne’s paraphrase of R.P. Blackmur—that ‘it is
    the function of poetry to *increase the sum* of the world’s
    available reality’ (*ibid*., p. 27; emphasis mine)—as well as his
    description of imaginative entities as ‘additions’ to the world,
    would seem to support the former, while the actual mechanics of
    poetic composition, in which pre-existing words are arranged in new
    patterns, tends towards the latter.

[^311]: The book is familiar to Prynne, being cited in a recent note as
    representative of a materialist philosophical tendency which he
    ‘understand\[s\] rather intimately’ (Prynne, ‘A Note to Josh Kotin
    and Jeff Dolven’, *No Prizes*, 4 (Winter 2015–16), 21–24 \[p. 21\]).

[^312]: Quentin Meillassoux, *After Finitude*, trans. by Ray Brassier
    (London: Continuum, 2008), p. 5.

[^313]: *Ibid*., p. 7.

[^314]: Wild provides a description of his own position which accords
    completely with Meillassoux’s description of correlationism: ‘The
    phenomenologist is simply one who is not content with the object
    alone or the subject alone, but who is concerned with the two in
    their intentional integrity, *as they always are actually found*’
    (Wild, p. 169, emphasis mine).

[^315]: *Ibid*., p. 10.

[^316]: *Ibid*., p. 13.

[^317]: Prynne, ‘Resistance and Difficulty’, p. 28.

[^318]: Graham Harman, ‘Meillassoux’s arche-fossil is not an
    “argument”’, *Object-Oriented Philosophy* (6 March 2014),
    &lt;https://doctorzamalek2.wordpress.com/2014/03/06/meillassouxs-archefossil-is-not-an-argument/&gt;
    \[accessed 12 June 2015\].

[^319]: Meillassoux, *After Finitude*, p. 50.

[^320]: Meillassoux, ‘Time without Becoming’, conference paper presented
    at Middlesex University (8 May 2008),
    &lt;https://speculativeheresy.files.wordpress.com/2008/07/3729-time\_without\_becoming.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 12 June 2015\].

[^321]: Meillassoux, *After Finitude*, pp. 130–31, n. 12.

[^322]: For an engagement with the the issues that surround the strict
    version of Meillassoux’s arche-fossil—or at least a similar set of
    issues—it is possible to turn to Prynne’s reading of the
    Anglo-Austrian physicist Wolfgang Rindler. According to Rindler, two
    types of ‘horizons’ exist in any theoretical model of the world: an
    event-horizon, beyond which events are in principle unobservable by
    any given observer, and a particle-horizon, which describes the same
    situation with reference to particles. ‘If a model possesses an
    event-horizon *and* a particle-horizon’, writes Rindler, ‘then for
    any observer originally attached to a given fundamental particle
    there exists a class of events absolutely beyond his cognizance, no
    matter how he journeys through space’ (W. Rindler, ‘Visual Horizons
    in World Models’, *Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
    Society*, 6 \[1956\], 662–77 \[p. 673\]). Writing to Ed Dorn in
    1972, as Justin Katko points out, Prynne extends Rindler’s theory by
    adding an ‘inference-horizon’: ‘If we infer logically the existence
    of what we cannot observe then the inference horizon exceeds the
    event horizon by the limits of logical extensibility’ (Prynne to
    Dorn, 25 April 1972, quoted in Katko, p. 282). Treating the
    technical concept of observability loosely, we might say that the
    strictly pre-human arche-fossil sits beyond the event- and
    particle-horizons of our world, but within the bounds of what Prynne
    terms the inference-horizon.

[^323]: *Ibid*., p. 7.

[^324]: *Ibid*., p. 47. Meillassoux’s stance is to be distinguished from
    the superficially similar position of Adorno and Horkheimer insofar
    as it is profoundly undialectical and does not hold that ‘\[m\]yth
    is already enlightenment’ (Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno,
    *Dialectic of Enlightenment*, ed. by Gunzelin Schmid Noerr, trans.
    by Edmund Jephcott \[Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press,
    2002\], p. xviii). Nevertheless, Meillassoux is far from being a
    ‘New Atheist’ of the Richard Dawkins variety, making sure to
    emphasise that ‘the religionizing of reason does not designate the
    act of faith as such—since the latter can obviously prove extremely
    valuable’ (*After Finitude*, p. 47).

[^325]: *Ibid*., pp. 43–48.

[^326]: Meillassoux’s two book-length publications subsequent to *After
    Finitude*—*Le Nombre et la sirène* (2011) and *Métaphysique et
    fiction des mondes hors-science* (2013)—both concern literature.

[^327]: Like other objects, the poem thus has facticity in the sense
    emphasised by Meillassoux.

[^328]: This distinction recalls that between Bateson’s alleged
    conception of the text as inert historical object and Leavis’s
    conception of it as living historical being in the
    criticism–scholarship debate, well summarised in Tae Chul Kim, ‘F.R.
    Leavis, or the Function of Criticism under Specialist Modernity’,
    Journal of British and American Studies, 10.1 (2004), 81–112
    (p. 105).

[^329]: Prynne, ‘In Cimmerian Darkness’, in *Poems*, pp. 74–75;
    Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, p. 198.

[^330]: For instance, in an early letter to Olson, Prynne mentions that
    Ward is ‘writing his second (totally ignored) novel’, but provides
    no details about the work (Prynne to Olson, 14 February 1962).

[^331]: Edward Upward, ‘Answers to questions from David Lambourne’,
    p. 4.

[^332]: Prynne to Riley, 23 June 1967.

[^333]: Prynne to Riley, 29 May 1967.

[^334]: At another point in the 29 May letter, Prynne makes a plea for
    ‘something better that \[*sic*\] mind/body, past/present dualisms,
    which arouse all manner of social antagonisms without more than
    touching on the issue.’

[^335]: Prynne to Riley, 23 June 1967.

[^336]: The significance of the implicit sexualisation of this ‘remorse’
    will become clearer below.

[^337]: Riley, ‘Peter Riley – Excerpts from a Notebook’, in *Certain
    Prose*, 2:3 \[339–40\], 118–20 (p. 120).

[^338]: Prynne’s attack on unoriginality here is of course undercut by
    the fact that he is almost directly channeling Ezra Pound. This
    connection will be considered briefly below.

[^339]: Wyndham Lewis, *Tarr* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010),
    p. 95.

[^340]: As with almost any claim about *Tarr*, this is qualified by the
    book’s complex textual history. The passage quoted by Prynne, along
    with much of the rest of Part II, was not included in the original
    serialisation of *Tarr* in *The Egoist*, ‘for want of space’ (*The
    Egoist*, 6.7 \[1 July 1916\], p. 107). First appearing in print in
    the 1918 bound Egoist Press edition (p. 103), it was subject to a
    number of revisions for the authoritative 1928 Chatto & Windus
    edition (p. 104)—principally, the addition of the clauses ‘conscious
    of his compressed putty-grey mask, he let his gaze stream out into
    space’. Thus, the passage effectively straddles the emergence of
    phenomenology as a major philosophical discipline.

[^341]: ‘Preface to the 1918 American Edition’, in *Tarr*, 285–88
    (pp. 285–86).

[^342]: ‘From the Prologue to the 1918 Egoist Press Edition’, in *Tarr*,
    288–89 (p. 288). Fredric Jameson offers a material basis for this
    status, claiming that Tarr ‘dramatizes the security of the liberal
    and counterrevolutionary class compromise of the British tradition
    from the seething and politicized history of the continental states’
    (Fredric Jameson, *Fables of Aggression: Wyndham Lewis, the
    Modernist as Fascist* \[Berkeley, CA: University of California
    Press, 1979\], p. 95).

[^343]: Scott W. Klein, ‘Introduction’, in *Tarr*, ix–xxix (p. xvi).

[^344]: *Ibid*., p. xiv.

[^345]: ‘Long Live the Vortex!’, *Blast*, 1 (1914), \[7–8\] (\[p. 7\]).

[^346]: ‘Manifesto—I’, *ibid*., 11–28 (p. 11).

[^347]: ‘Manifesto—II’, *ibid*., pp. 30–43.

[^348]: This analysis accepts the conventional attribution of
    ‘Manifesto—II’ primarily to Lewis, despite the multiple signatories.
    Inline citations correspond to the text’s individually numbered
    sections and theses.

[^349]: There is a clear parallel here with the ambivalent relation
    between *Scrutiny* and Cambridge, discussed in Chapter 1.

[^350]: Laura Steele, ‘Comedy and the Conceptual in Douglas Oliver’s
    *The Harmless Building*’, *Intercapillary Space* (September 2006),
    &lt;http://intercapillaryspace.blogspot.co.uk/2006/09/comedy-and-conceptual-in-douglas.html&gt;
    \[accessed 27 April 2015\].

[^351]: Douglas Oliver, *The Harmless Building* (London: Ferry Press and
    Grosseteste Review Books, 1973), p. 102; *The Harmless Building*, in
    *Three Variations on the Theme of Harm* (London: Paladin, 1990),
    111–255 (p. 212).

[^352]: Prynne to Oliver, 9, 10 and 11 January 1972; Prynne, ‘From a
    Letter to Douglas Oliver’, *Grosseteste Review*, 6.1–4 (1973),
    pp. 152–54. All quotations here are from the original letter, which
    bears three consecutive dates but was apparently sent in one
    envelope.

[^353]: As quoted in Chapter 1, Prynne describes the influence of
    Ashbery and his ‘various camp followers’ as a source of ‘feeble
    insecurity’ in some emerging English poetry (Prynne to Riley, 16
    March 1969).

[^354]: ‘nympholepsy, n.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2015),
    &lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/129422&gt; \[accessed 28 April
    2015\]. Prynne seems to have been fond of the term at this point,
    using it again in an October 1972 letter to Dorn, though this time
    in reference to the residents of the York Street Commune in
    Vancouver, where Prynne had read in 1971 (Prynne to Dorn, 25 October
    1972).

[^355]: This table does not include ‘phenomenological’ as the earlier
    stages of the letter make clear that Oliver’s novel is itself highly
    phenomenological; the pejorative weight in ‘pre-sexual
    phenomenology’ is assigned entirely to ‘pre-sexual’.

[^356]: Prynne to Riley, 23 June 1967. Ironically, the second thesis of
    Lewis’s ‘Manifesto—II’ calls for the establishment of a ‘violent
    structure of adolescent clearness between two extremes’ (I.2).

[^357]: The phrase ‘world tube’ is also used in Prynne’s contemporaneous
    ‘Full Tilt Botany: Ideal Weapon for Suicide Pacts’ (*Bean News*, 1
    \[1972\], \[p. 8\]), which will be discussed in relation to *The*
    Plant Time Manifold *Transcripts* below.

[^358]: Oliver, *The Harmless Building*, p. 143; *Three Variations*,
    p. 254. This reading of Prynne’s division of the novel is
    disputable, insofar as he describes ‘Chapters 11 to 15 as texte,
    what follows as hors-texte’, while the section of direct address
    described above arguably falls within Chapter 15 in both published
    versions of the novel.

[^359]: Lewis, *Time and Western Man*, ed. by Paul Edwards (Santa Rosa,
    CA: Black Sparrow Press, 1993), p. 88.

[^360]: The traces of this contradiction can be felt throughout the
    essay. At one point, having thoroughly criticised *Ulysses*, Lewis
    speculates that ‘*The Enemy of the Stars*, a play written and
    published by me in 1914, obliterated by the War, turned up \[…\] in
    Zurich, and was responsible here and there for the manner of Joyce’s
    book’ (*ibid*., p. 107).

[^361]: Prynne to Olson, 3 February 1963. According to Ralph Maud,
    ‘Olson liked to tell of Ezra Pound’s returning to Joyce his
    presentation copy of *Finnegan’s Wake* with the word “Decadence”
    written over the cover’ (Ralph Maud, *Charles Olson’s Reading: A
    Biography* \[Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press,
    1996\], p. 12), an anecdote which Prynne has also been known to
    tell. While consistent with his pre-war persona, the fascist Pound’s
    denunciation of artistic ‘decadence’ in the late 1930s has troubling
    resonances with the Nazi campaign against ‘*entartete Kunst*’ in the
    same period.

[^362]: A similar conception of Pound’s poetry as spatial rather than
    temporal is offered in the conclusion to Chapter VI of Davie’s 1964
    study, which is based explicitly on ‘conversations with J.H. Prynne’
    (Davie, *Ezra Pound: Poet as Sculptor*, p. vi). Davie describes
    Pound’s *Cathay* and his later translations of Cavalcanti as ‘a
    static poetry; its constituent parts seem to be almost as much
    components of an arrangement in space, as phases of a process
    through time. \[… O\]f the lines in \[‘South-Folk in Cold Country’\]
    it seems more accurate to say that they are placed one beneath
    another, than to say that one comes after another’ (p. 118).

[^363]: A 2011 exhibition of watercolours at the Tate Britain gallery
    was advertised with the slogan: ‘Tate Britain \[i\]nvites you to
    challenge your preconceptions of what watercolour is’
    (‘Watercolour’, *Tate*,
    &lt;http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/watercolour&gt;
    \[accessed 2 November 2014\].

[^364]: Lewis, *Time and Western Man*, p. 79.

[^365]: *Ibid*., p. 92.

[^366]: Iris Murdoch, ‘The Idea of Perfection’, *Yale Review*, 53.3
    (Spring 1964), 342–80 (p. 348).

[^367]: *Ibid*., p. 349.

[^368]: *Ibid*., p. 352.

[^369]: *Ibid*., p. 358.

[^370]: *Ibid*.

[^371]: *Ibid*., p. 361.

[^372]: *Ibid*., p. 376. Murdoch describes the notion of art ‘for its
    own sake’ as ‘the familiar Kantian-Bloomsbury slogan’, recalling
    Leavis and Prynne’s shared antipathy towards the Bloomsbury Group,
    and perhaps revealing a cultural or a social as well as a
    theoretical motive behind her implicit critique of G.E. Moore
    (p. 377).

[^373]: Oliver, *The Harmless Building*, p. 5; *Three Variations,*
    p. 113.

[^374]: *Ibid*., p. 254.

[^375]: The connection of this vague aesthetico-ethical attitude to
    politics is made clearer in a 1986 letter to Oliver: ‘I do not
    believe in a political centre which is any more than the adroit
    hedging & edging of a party system; but I would separate this from
    what it claims to imitate, which is the central ordinariness of
    ethical intuition and human tolerance, even of moral *habit*, in a
    populace not brutalised by tyranny or privation nor hypnotised into
    disclaiming its own sentimental loyalties’ (Prynne to Oliver, 16
    February 1986).

[^376]: Prynne to Dorn, 9 September 1975. The potential fear to which
    Prynne refers may relate to a creative crisis and mental breakdown
    experienced by Upward’s protagonist in *The Rotten Elements*, though
    this would be obscure to Dorn. The ‘project’ is also ambiguous, but
    is probably Prynne’s most recent poetic publication, *High Pink on
    Chrome* (1975).

[^377]: The assessment conforms, for instance, to that given by Anthony
    Arblaster in a 1978 conference paper (Anthony Arblaster, ‘Edward
    Upward and the Novel of Politics’ \[1978\], *Edward Upward*,
    &lt;http://www.edwardupward.info\slash pdfs\slash Arblaster.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 5 May 2015\]).

[^378]: The view of Upward as a quintessentially ‘thirties’ figure was
    apparently shared by Donald Davie, who sent the older writer a
    typescript copy of his 1953 poem ‘Remembering the Thirties’. Whether
    Davie knew Upward personally is not clear, but there is at least one
    other point of personal connection with Prynne, via A.C. Spearing,
    who was a pupil of Upward’s at Alleyn’s School and a contemporary of
    Prynne’s both as an undergraduate at Jesus College and as a fellow
    at Caius. Writing to Upward in 1959, Spearing described his
    appointment at the latter, noting that ‘my new college, which has
    never in the past encouraged the study of English, has had a change
    of heart (or at least a change of Master), and wants to build up its
    English side in future. The new Master is Professor Mott, who is a
    physicist but sees himself as a sort of Renaissance all-rounder, and
    he’s had a new Director of Studies in English appointed (Donald
    Davie, whom you may have heard of as a poet and as the author of
    *Purity of Diction in English Verse* and *Articulate Energy*), with
    me to assist him’ (A.C. Spearing to Upward, 14 July 1959).

[^379]: New light was shed on this particular volume of the trilogy in
    2014 with the release of Upward’s personal MI5 file, the contents of
    which are described in Louis Goddard, ‘Not spooked’, *Times Literary
    Supplement* (11 December 2015), p. 17.

[^380]: Upward, *No Home But the Struggle*, ed. by David Allinson,
    *Edward Upward*,
    &lt;http://www.edwardupward.info\slash pdfs\slash No\_Home\_But\_the\_Struggle.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 5 May 2015\], p. 275.

[^381]: Upward, *The Rotten Elements*, ed. by David Allinson, *Edward
    Upward*,
    &lt;http://www.edwardupward.info\slash pdfs\slash The\_Rotten\_Elements.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 27 November 2015\], p. 53.

[^382]: *No Home But the Struggle*, first published as part of *The
    Spiral Ascent* in 1977, contains a much broader range of sexual
    material than either of the previous two books, including the
    account of a young Sebrill’s relationship with a fellow schoolboy.

[^383]: Prynne to Barry MacSweeney, 7 August 1975.

[^384]: Upward, ‘Statement for the Literature/Sociology Conference on
    “1936” at Essex University, July 1978’, *Edward Upward*,
    &lt;http://www.edwardupward.info/pdfs/Statement.pdf&gt; \[accessed 5
    May 2015\], p. 7.

[^385]: ‘Doug Oliver was over here a short while ago and is in extreem
    good form, wary as ever and mucho quick off the mark. He’s to be
    lecturing at Wivenhoe from this October, which is likely to be Off
    the Map for quite a few, I should think. Did his fight reports reach
    you OK?’ (Prynne to Dorn, 9 September 1975).

[^386]: Katherine Bucknell, ‘Introduction’, in Christopher Isherwood and
    Upward, *The Mortmere Stories* (London: Enitharmon Press, 1994),
    9–21 (p. 9). Detailed, if semi-fictional, accounts of Mortmere are
    provided in *No Home But the Struggle* and in Isherwood’s *Lions and
    Shadows* (1938).

[^387]: Isherwood, foreword to ‘The Railway Accident’, in Upward, *The
    Railway Accident and Other Stories* (London: Penguin, 1972), 33–35
    (pp. 33–34).

[^388]: Upward, ‘The Railway Accident’, in *The Railway Accident*, 33–84
    (pp. 61–62).

[^389]: Oliver, *The Harmless Building*, pp. 46–47; *Three Variations*,
    p. 155.

[^390]: In a 1983 journal entry, Upward gave his own inspiration as ‘a
    disastrous railway accident that had happened near Ilford on the
    line between Romford, where my home was, and Liverpool Street’
    (Upward, quoted in Peter Stansky, *Edward Upward: Art and Life*
    (London: Enitharmon, 2016), pp. 97–98). He appears to be referring
    to the 1915 Ilford rail crash, which killed ten and injured
    approximately 500 on News Year’s Day.

[^391]: Oliver, *Three Variations*, p. 115. If neglect was not already
    established as the default mode of relation to Upward’s work, it
    would be surprising that he does not merit a mention in John
    Brannigan’s recent *Archipelagic Modernism: Literature in the Irish
    and British Isles, 1890–1970* (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
    Press, 2015).

[^392]: Isherwood, foreword to ‘The Railway Accident’, p. 34.

[^393]: Upward, ‘The Railway Accident’, p. 40.

[^394]: Mario Faraone, ‘“Chambers of Oblivion”: I Treni di Edward Upward
    tra Allucinazione, Storia e Memoria’, in *Scorci Improvvisi di Altri
    Orizzonti*, ed. by Faraone, Martina Bertazzon, Giovanna Manzato and
    Roberta Tommasi (Morrisville, NC: Lulu, 2008), 215–34 (p. 233).

[^395]: Jameson, pp. 28–29.

[^396]: Michael Beatty, ‘The Earliest Fiction of Wyndham Lewis and *The
    Wild Body*’, *Theoria*, 48 (May 1977), 37–45 (p. 37).

[^397]: Prynne to Riley, 13 September 1967.

[^398]: Lewis, ‘Inferior Religions’, in *The Wild Body: ‘A Soldier of
    Humour’ and Other Stories* (New York: Harcourt, Brace and Company,
    1928), 233–43 (p. 233).

[^399]: *Ibid*., pp. 233–34.

[^400]: Lewis, ‘The Meaning of the Wild Body’, in *The Wild Body*,
    244–251 (p. 245); William James, *Some Problems of Philosophy: A
    Beginning of an Introduction to Philosophy* (Lincoln, NE: University
    of Nebraska Press, 1996), p. 39. For the author of *The Apes of
    God*, this realisation is perhaps related to the passage into the
    ‘realm of ape-forms and automata’ which David Trotter, translating
    Paul Celan, describes as characterising Prynne’s *Brass*, Ted
    Hughes’s *Crow* and Geoffrey Hill’s *Mercian Hymns* (Trotter,
    p. 224).

[^401]: Oliver, *Three Variations*, p. 170; *ibid*., p. 188.

[^402]: Upward, ‘Answers to questions’.

[^403]: Lewis, ‘The Meaning of the Wild Body’, p. 247.

[^404]: Lewis, ‘Inferior Religions’, p. 236.

[^405]: Lewis, ‘The Meaning of the Wild Body’, p. 246. Lewis returns in
    this piece to the issue of national identity, offering a more
    nuanced perspective than that which is implied in *Tarr*: ‘It is
    easy for us to see, if we are french, that the German is “absurd,”
    or if german, that the French is “ludicrous,” for we are *outside*
    in that case. \[…\] What it is far more difficult to appreciate,
    with any constancy, is that, whatever his relative social advantages
    or particular national virtues may be, every man is profoundly open
    to the same criticism or ridicule from any opponent who is only
    different enough’ (*ibid*., pp. 245–46).

[^406]: Isherwood, foreword to ‘The Railway Accident’, p. 34.

[^407]: Lewis, ‘Inferior Religions’, p. 236.

[^408]: ‘The “PLANT TIME MANIFOLD” Transcripts’, *Grosseteste Review*,
    7.1–3 (Summer 1974), pp. 80–88. The text will hereafter be referred
    to in the singular as ‘the *PTM*’, in accordance with Justin Katko’s
    usage.

[^409]: Prynne to Dorn, 14 March 1972, published as ‘& Hoc Genus Omne’,
    *Bean News* (1972), \[p. 2\]; Prynne to Dorn, 25 March 1972,
    published as ‘Full Tilt Botany: Ideal Weapons for Suicide Pacts’,
    *Bean News* (1972), \[p. 8\]. A number of less significant
    *PTM*-related texts are listed in Katko, p. 248, n. 9.

[^410]: Katko, p. 252. A comprehensive overview of existing work on the
    *PTM* is provided in Katko, pp. 250–57.

[^411]: Katko, p. 257.

[^412]: *Ibid*.

[^413]: ‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’, in *Poems*, 233–42
    (p. 234). The posture of absolute seriousness adopted by Katko is of
    course scrupulously Prynnian in character. It is the *PTM*’s own
    anomalousness in Prynne’s *oeuvre* which creates the limits against
    which this approach strains.

[^414]: Drew Milne, ‘The Art of Wit and the Cambridge Science Park’, in
    *Contemporary Poetry and Contemporary Science*, ed. by Robert
    Crawford (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006), 170–87 (p. 180).

[^415]: ‘The *Plant Time Manifold* Transcripts’, p. 235.

[^416]: *Ibid*., p. 236.

[^417]: *Ibid*., p. 237.

[^418]: *Ibid*., p. 236.

[^419]: *Ibid*., p. 237.

[^420]: Kingsley Amis, *Lucky Jim* (London: Victor Gollancz, 1957),
    p. 230. It is an open question whether the use of the archaic ‘shew’
    for ‘show’ in Lichen’s dialogue (*PTM*, p. 236) is intended to
    contribute to this effect, given Prynne’s subsequent use of the term
    in non-fictional contexts, e.g. ‘basic features of morphology and
    grammar are claimed to shew correlation with features of their
    regular speech-forms’ (Prynne, *Stars, Tigers and the Shape of
    Words* \[London: Birkbeck College, 1993\], p. 7). There is a further
    possibility that Lichen’s dialogue is intended to represent a
    Scottish accent, the character being resident at the ‘Edinburgh
    Institute for Plant History’ (*PTM*, p. 234).

[^421]: Amis, *Lucky Jim*, p. 231. There are, of course, no shortage of
    novels which satirise the academy. A more avant-garde model for the
    *PTM* can be found in Samuel Beckett’s *Watt* (1953), published one
    year before *Lucky Jim*; specifically, in the farcical university
    committee scene that concludes the story of Mr. Louit and
    Mr. Nackybal. As M. Keith Booker points out, this ‘appears to be a
    cross between Abbott and Costello and academic committees
    everywhere—with the suggestion that there is not much difference
    between the two’ (M. Keith Booker, *Literature and Domination: Sex,
    Knowledge, and Power in Modern Fiction* \[Gainesville, FL:
    University Press of Florida, 1993\], p. 34).

[^422]: Darwin—who shares a forename and surname with Charles Darwin’s
    grandfather—uses a consistently technical vocabulary in his regular
    ‘bulletins’, and in ‘When is now’ appears to have access to data
    from the fictional ‘Cambridge-based Bioparallax Research Station’
    (*Bean News* \[1972\], \[p. 4\]).

[^423]: Margaret Thatcher, ‘Written Statement launching Education White
    Paper (*A Framework for Expansion*)’ (6 December 1972), *Margaret
    Thatcher Foundation*,
    &lt;http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/102233&gt; \[accessed 7
    September 2015\].

[^424]: Prynne to Dorn, 10 January 1972.

[^425]: Prynne to Dorn, 5 March 1975.

[^426]: Another Magritte painting, *La Durée poignardée* (‘Time
    Transfixed’), is used on the cover of the 1972 Penguin edition of
    Upward’s *The Railway Accident*.

[^427]: *PTM*, p. 238. This is perhaps the most obvious respect in which
    Prynne’s Erasmus Darwin follows the work of his real-life namesake,
    grandfather to Charles Darwin. In his scientific (mock-)epic *The
    Loves of the Plants*, the elder Darwin uses relationships between
    personified plants to explore Linnaeus’s taxonomy (Erasmus Darwin,
    *The Botanic Garden. Part II* (Dudlin \[*sic*\]: J. Moore, 1796),
    &lt;https://archive.org/details/botanicgardenpoe02darwuoft&gt;
    \[accessed 13 June 2016\].

[^428]: The issue of prejudice is of course taken up in the seminar
    scene, in which Lichen claims that ‘there are all too many today who
    confuse height above ground with innate developmental superiority’
    (*ibid*., p. 236).

[^429]: *Ibid*., p. 234.

[^430]: *Ibid*., p. 235.

[^431]: *Ibid*., p. 236.

[^432]: *Ibid*.

[^433]: *Ibid*., p. 237.

[^434]: Hugh Kenner, ‘Wyndham Lewis: The Satirist as Barbarian’, *The
    Yearbook of English Studies*, 14 (1984), 264–75 (p. 269).

[^435]: *Ibid*., p. 236–37.

[^436]: This moment of realisation is akin to what Kenner describes as
    satire’s oscillation between seduction and shock: ‘What were we
    doing, sagely nodding our heads as the Modest Proposer prattled
    about the sheer nuisance of being assailed by beggars? Is *that* a
    way to state the Irish problem?’ (Kenner, p. 264).

[^437]: Key environmentalist milestones in this period include the
    establishment of the United States Environmental Protection Agency
    in 1970, the US ban on the pesticide DDT in 1972 and the founding of
    the first national green party, Britain’s PEOPLE, in 1973.

[^438]: Peter Tompkins and Christopher Bird, ‘Love among the cabbages’,
    *Harper’s Magazine* (November 1972), pp. 90–92, 94–96.

[^439]: Tompkins and Bird, *The Secret Life of Plants* (New York: Harper
    & Row, 1973), p. x.

[^440]: Prynne, *Graft and Corruption: Shakespeare’s Sonnet 15*
    (Cambridge: Face Press, 2015), p. 52. The latest book cited in the
    text is Roy Strong’s *The Renaissance Garden in England* (1979),
    which Prynne describes as ‘recent’.

[^441]: William Shakespeare, *Shake-speares Sonnets Neuer before
    Imprinted* (London, 1609), sig. B~4~^r^, quoted in *ibid*. , p. 12.

[^442]: *Ibid*., p. 14.

[^443]: *Ibid*., p. 39.

[^444]: *Ibid*., pp. 38–39.

[^445]: *Ibid*., p. 49.

[^446]: Prynne to Robin Blaser, 28 August 1973. Speaking in Guangzhou in
    2005, Prynne claimed that ‘there are, at the present time, two great
    poetical traditions on the planet. One of them is the English
    poetical tradition, and the other, of course, is the Chinese’
    (Prynne, ‘Keynote Speech at the First Pearl River Poetry Conference,
    Guangzhou, P.R. China, 28th June 2005’, *Gonville and Caius
    College*,
    &lt;http://babylon.acad.cai.cam.ac.uk/students/study/english/chinese/keynote.pdf&gt;
    \[accessed 9 September 2016\]. Courtesy to his largely Chinese
    audience here masks a spectacular land-grab on the European front:
    what of French, German or Italian?

[^447]: Prynne, *Graft and Corruption*, p. 31. For demonstrations of
    Prynne’s aversion to the restrictions of conventional etymology, see
    ‘A Pedantic Note in Two Parts’, *Stars, Tigers and the Shape of
    Words* and *Mental Ears and Poetic Work*, *passim*.

[^448]: Shakespeare, *The Winter’s Tale* (Folio, 1623), IV.iv.89–97
    (sig. Bb~2~^v^), quoted in Prynne, *Graft and Corruption*, p. 34.

[^449]: *Ibid*., pp. 35–38.

[^450]: *Ibid*., p. 37.

[^451]: A.V.S. de Reuck and Julie Knight, eds, *Touch, Heat and Pain*
    (London: J. & A. Churchill, 1966). Writing to Oliver about *The
    Harmless Building*, Prynne remarks on ‘\[h\]ow extemely useful it
    was that I had some little time ago finished reading *Fundamentals
    of Neurology* by Ernest Gardner (a quite banal and straightforward
    textbook)’ (Prynne to Oliver, 9, 10 and 11 January 1972). It is
    important to note, however, that the title of *Wound Response*
    refers to a characteristic of plants rather than humans; as Dobran
    puts it, ‘\[t\]he title, *Wound Response*, \[…\] performs a
    bait-and-switch tactic. By its juxtaposition to an epigraph from a
    Ciba symposium on *Touch, Heat and Pain*, it *suggests* human “wound
    response”, while *referring* to plant wound response’ (Dobran, ‘The
    Difficult Style’, p. 182). Human and plant are metaphorically
    conflated, just as in the text of the *PTM*.

[^452]: Elaine Scarry, *The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the
    World* (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), p. 3. The geological
    metaphor adopted here would no doubt appeal to Prynne.

[^453]: Tompkins and Bird, p. 5.

[^454]: Katko, pp. 259–64. The article was published in *Biological
    Reviews*, 9.1 (January 1934), pp. 79–109.

[^455]: Pnina G. Abir-Am, ‘The Biotheoretical Gathering,
    Transdisciplinary Authority and the Incipient Legitimation of
    Molecular Biology in the 1930s: New Perspective on the Historical
    Sociology of Science’, *History of Science*, 25 (1987), 1–70
    (pp. 9–10).

[^456]: *Ibid*., pp. 23–26.

[^457]: *Ibid*., pp. 26–27. Abir-Am acknowledges that ‘the
    Biotheoretical Gathering’s projects in X-ray crystallography and
    biochemistry survived into the current accepted repertoire of facts
    and methods in molecular biology, while topology and experimental
    morphology did not’, but points out that ‘this is an outcome
    predicated on rather contingent policy actions in the late 1930s’,
    principally the decision not to fund the research institute
    described above (*ibid*., p. 27).

[^458]: Three of the key elements of this chapter are tied together
    neatly in an observation that opens Timothy Materer’s study of
    Vorticism. Discussing the vortex concept itself, he describes the
    influence on Ezra Pound of the theory of ‘vorti-cells’, as
    propounded by Allen Upward, Edward Upward’s uncle. According to
    Materer, Upward ‘would no doubt have considered that the discovery
    of the helical structure of the DNA model supported his theory’
    (Timothy Materer, *Vortex: Pound, Eliot, and Lewis* \[London:
    Cornell University Press, 1979\], p. 16). That this observation is
    taken, by ackowledgement, from p. 67 of Donald Davie’s *Ezra Pound*
    (New York: The Viking Press, 1976) perhaps even constitutes a fourth
    link in the chain.

[^459]: Prynne to Dorn, 11 August 1978.

[^460]: Prynne to Dorn, 22 January 1963. A third figure in the
    scientific milieu that supported the composition of the *PTM*,
    besides Needham and Crick, is Rupert Sheldrake, author of *A New
    Science of Life* (1981), a draft version of which was read and
    commented on by Prynne. Discussing the work with Dorn, Prynne says
    explicitly that ‘Rupert was actively interested by the *content* of
    the Plant Time antics’ (Prynne to Dorn, 18 March 1982). Prynne’s and
    Sheldrake’s early academic careers are remarkably similar, both
    having held the Frank Knox Memorial Fellowship at Harvard following
    their undergraduate degrees at Cambridge.

[^461]: F.H.C. Crick and L.E. Orgel, ‘Directed Panspermia’, *Icarus*, 19
    (1973), 341–46 (p. 343).

[^462]: Prynne to Francis Crick, 22 March 1982.

[^463]: George Puttenham, *The Arte of English Poesie* (London, 1589),
    Lib. III, “Of Ornament”, Chap. XXV, pp. 253–54, quoted in Prynne,
    *Graft and Corruption*, p. 35. Prynne even describes our relation to
    the good scientist using the horticultural term ‘stock’.

[^464]: Martin Priestman, *The Poetry of Erasmus Darwin: Enlightened
    Spaces, Romantic Times* (London: Routledge, 2016), p. 13.

[^465]: The metaphorical furniture of the panspermia hypothesis—seeding,
    fertilisation, etc.—is relentless in its presentation of active male
    and passive female forces, to the extent that Prynne’s use of the
    male pronoun to describe the good scientist is practically
    inevitable.

[^466]: According to Lewis, ‘\[t\]he creation of a work of art is an act
    of the same description as the evolution of wings on the sides of a
    fish, the feathering of its fins; or the invention of a weapon
    within the body of a hymenopter to enable it to meet the terrible
    needs of its life’ (Lewis, *The Caliph’s Design: Architects! Where
    is your Vortex?*, ed. by Paul Edwards (Santa Barbara, CA: Black
    Sparrow Press, 1986), p. 65. That Prynne’s implicitly procreative
    conception of poetic composition persists beyond the chronological
    scope of this thesis can be seen by looking at the 2010
    lecture-essay ‘Poetic Thought’, in which Prynne describes how ‘the
    focus of poetic composition, as a text takes shape in the struggle
    of the poet to separate from it, projects into the textual arena an
    intense energy of conception and differentiation’ (Prynne, ‘Poetic
    Thought’, *Textual Practice*, 24.4 \[August 2010\], 595–606
    \[p. 596\]).

[^467]: This is not to suggest that Prynne’s thought is deliberately
    consistent on these points. In the same letter to Riley, Prynne
    counterposes prose and poetry, suggesting that the latter is *not*
    ‘evolutionary & self-extending’, but rather a ‘closed form’ (Prynne
    to Riley, 15 September 1967). In contradiction of the comparison
    between reproduction and poetic creation above, the reproductive
    function is assigned to the processes of argument and disagreement,
    from which poetry is exempt.

[^468]: Needham, p. 107, quoted in Katko, p. 261.

[^469]: Prynne to Dorn, 18 March 1982.

[^470]: Pound, ‘A Few Don’ts by an Imagiste’, *Poetry* (March 1913),
    200–06 (p. 202).

[^471]: Prynne, ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, p. 141. The use of
    ‘non-trivial’, a loan from the vocabulary of mathematics, is itself
    an example of such historical-contextual influence.

[^472]: Eric Falci, *The Cambridge Introduction to British Poetry,
    1945–2010* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015), p. 3.

[^473]: Prynne, ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, p. 130.

[^474]: An example from Prynne’s notes for students on Pound was given
    in this thesis’s introduction. In the case of Herbert, he goes so
    far as to lament the lack of available biographical information,
    particularly about Herbert’s library and reading habits (Prynne,
    ‘George Herbert, “Love \[III\]”’, p. 16).

[^475]: Prynne, ‘A Note to Josh Kotin and Jeff Dolven’, p. 21.

[^476]: *Ibid*. The use of ‘vulgar’ here, though perhaps a deliberate
    adoption of an expected role, shows the continuing influence of a
    class-inflected Leavisite antipathy towards popular literature.

[^477]: *The Paris Review Interviews*, vol. 1 (New York: Picador, 2006),
    \[dustjacket\].

[^478]: ‘anecdote, *n*.’, *OED Online* (Oxford University Press, 2016),
    &lt;http://www.oed.com/view/Entry/7367&gt; \[accessed 29 June
    2016\].

[^479]: Prynne, ‘Huts’, p. 616.

[^480]: Prynne, reading (York Street Commune, Vancouver, 1 August 1971).
    This apparently time-limited biographical recalcitrance is mirrored
    in Prynne’s attitude to dedications. Prynne includes dedications in
    his very earliest major collections, *Force of Circumstance* and
    *The White Stones*—to his English teacher and his wife
    respectively—but subsequently abandons them. The elegy ‘Es Lebe der
    König’, published in *Brass* and dedicated to Paul Celan, is
    exceptional, and has rightly been read as such: in fact, it sits in
    an almost twenty-year period from 1969 to 1989 in which Prynne used
    no other dedications at all. (Prynne, ‘Es Lebe der König’, in
    *Poems*, pp. 169–70. Mellors describes it as ‘the central poem in
    *Brass*’, implying a certain divergence through centrality
    \[p. 188\].) *Word Order* (1989) is dedicated to an unidentified
    ‘J.P.’, who may be Prynne’s daughter, but it is not until the 1990s
    that clear dedications to poets reappear: *Not-You* (1993) is
    dedicated to ‘Che Qian-zi and Zhou Ya-ping | and \[…\] the
    ORIGINALS’, a group of Chinese poets, while the 1999 Bloodaxe
    edition of *Poems* is dedicated to Prynne’s French translator,
    Bernard Dubourg. None of the poets mentioned above wrote or writes
    in English; in fact, Prynne’s first dedication to a poet who wrote
    in English—if not an English poet—does not come until 2005, fully
    fifty years after the beginning of his poetic career, with the
    offering of the second Bloodaxe edition of *Poems* to Ed Dorn, who
    died in 1999.

[^481]: Terry Eagleton, ‘A Toast at the Trocadero’, *London Review of
    Books*, 38.4 (18 February 2016), 9–10 (p. 10).

[^482]: Notices, in *Certain Prose*, 1:11 \[173\], pp. 24–25; ‘Roll
    Call’, in *ibid*., 1:15 \[266\], pp. 78–79.

[^483]: Not atypically for a person of his sex, generation and class,
    Prynne attended all-boys prep and day schools before undertaking
    National Service. This was followed immediately by an undergraduate
    degree, graduate work and employment at all-male colleges (Caius did
    not admit female students or fellows until as late as 1979) and
    publication in male-dominated little magazines.

[^484]: This is not to suggest that Mellors thinks that it can; his book
    is one study of a particular aspect of these poets’ work.

[^485]: Brady, p. 245.

[^486]: Prynne, ‘The Bee Target on his Shoulder’, in *Poems*,
    pp. 150–52.

[^487]: As Ryan Dobran points out, ‘Do not love this man’ is a direct
    negation of a phrase from Olson’s ‘The Distances’: ‘Love this man’
    (Dobran, ‘The Difficult Style’, p. 138; Olson, ‘The Distances’, in
    *The Collected Poems of Charles Olson*, ed. by George F. Butterick
    \[Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1987\], pp. 491–92).

[^488]: Hall, p. 43.

[^489]: Sutherland, ‘J.H. Prynne and Philology’, p. 215.

[^490]: Mellors, p. 181.

[^491]: *Cf*. p. 10.

[^492]: A. David Moody, *Ezra Pound: Poet: A Portrait of the Man and His
    Work*, 3 vols (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009–15). For
    Pound’s use of the phrase, see Pound, ‘XXIV’, in *The Cantos of Ezra
    Pound* (New York: New Directions, 1996), 110–14 (p. 112) and ‘LXII’,
    in *ibid*., 341–50 (p. 350).

[^493]: Pound, ‘XLV’, in *ibid*., 229–30 (p. 230).

[^494]: This is not to suggest that Prynne is in any sense unaware of
    issues of poetic fatherhood and influence: self-conscious tics in
    his correspondence, such as referring to Donald Davie by his
    initials (D.A.D.), show that he is very much aware of them. Nor is
    it to suggest that Prynne is lax in his acknowledgement of source
    material in general, a notion dispelled by poems as diverse as ‘The
    Glacial Question, Unsolved’ and *Kazoo Dreamboats*. The point, as
    noted above in relation to dedications, is that he does not go out
    of his way to acknowledge specifically poetic influence, e.g. in
    matters of style, even in periods when his style has been
    recognisably derivative of, say, Olson or Tomlinson.

[^495]: First appearing in *Poetry* (April 1913), pp. 11–12, the poem
    was accompanied on its second page by ‘In a Station of the Metro’, a
    piece whose ‘wet, black bough’ constitutes a direct development of
    the ‘new wood’ that ‘A Pact’ attributes to Whitman.

[^496]: Pound is perhaps even akin to the symbolic father described by
    Jacques Lacan, whose ‘true function \[…\] is fundamentally to unite
    (and not to set in opposition) a desire and the Law’ (Jacques Lacan,
    *Écrits: A Selection*, trans. by Alan Sheridan \[London: Tavistock
    Publicatons, 1977\], p. 321).

[^497]: This term is used in a more straightforward sense than in
    Charlotte Perkins Gilman’s *The Man-Made World: Or, Our Androcentric
    Culture* (1911), referring simply to a worldview which places male
    human beings at its centre.

[^498]: An obvious example of such disregard is Prynne’s discussion of
    Shelley and Malthus in relation to contemporary reproductive policy,
    in which women are viewed as mechanical functions in a bio-economic
    system regulated primarily by male legislators. While a charitable
    interpretation would claim that it is precisely this system which
    Prynne is arguing *against*, it is nevertheless the case that the
    argument takes place within a material intellectual context—*The
    English Intelligencer*—which is only marginally less male-dominated
    than the 44th Parliament itself. As mentioned in Chapter 2, the
    proportion of recipients of *The English Intelligencer* who were
    women was, at the height of its admittedly limited circulation, less
    than seven per cent. The equivalent rate for female MPs after the
    1966 election was approximately four per cent (‘Women MPs &
    parliamentary candidates since 1945’, *UK Political Info*,
    &lt;http://www.ukpolitical.info/FemaleMPs.htm&gt; \[accessed 2
    February 2016\]). In any case, few of the female recipients of the
    *Intelligencer* participated actively in its discussions.

[^499]: This is not to suggest that this position is in any way unusual
    for a male poet of Prynne’s generation (not to mention later
    generations). The difficulty of shaking off such ingrained
    assumptions is shown in the *Paris Review* interview, where Prynne
    repeatedly corrects himself after using male pronouns to refer to
    the generalised poet figure: ‘a kind of vigilance that motivates a
    writer to keep his wits about him—or her’ (Prynne, ‘The Art of
    Poetry’, p. 192); ‘every time some grand poet shot his mouth off—or
    hers’ (*ibid*., p. 193).

[^500]: The usage of similar terms such as ‘human’ or ‘woman’ across the
    text does not show any comparable trend. While the text used may be
    subject to scanning errors, these should be approximately randomly
    distributed and would therefore not affect the shape of the chart.

[^501]: Without claiming it as ‘seal of approval’ for the statistical
    approach, it is interesting to note that Prynne himself has made use
    of similar analyses: discussing his compositional process in 2014,
    he described checking words against a digital text of his collected
    poems to review past usages (Prynne, ‘A Dialogue with Nicholas
    Royle’).

[^502]: Prynne to Oliver, 5 September 1994.

[^503]: Prynne, ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, p. 104.

[^504]: Prynne, ‘The Poet’s Imaginary’, p. 96.

[^505]: Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’, p. 207.

[^506]: Prynne, ‘Mental Ears and Poetic Work’, p. 141.

[^507]: *Ibid*.

[^508]: Prynne, ‘The Art of Poetry’, p. 177.
